The Project Gutenberg eBook, The First Quarter-Century of Steam
Locomotives in North America, by Smith Hempstone Oliver


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: The First Quarter-Century of Steam Locomotives in North America
       Remaining Relics and Operable Replicas with a Catalog of Locomotive Models in the U. S. National Museum. United States National Museum Bulletin 210


Author: Smith Hempstone Oliver



Release Date: May 4, 2016  [eBook #51976]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FIRST QUARTER-CENTURY OF STEAM
LOCOMOTIVES IN NORTH AMERICA***


E-text prepared by Stephen Hutcheson, Dave Morgan, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this file
      which includes the more than 80 original illustrations.
      See 51976-h.htm or 51976-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/51976/51976-h/51976-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/51976/51976-h.zip)


Transcriber’s note:

      Text enclosed by underscores is in italics (_italics_).





THE FIRST QUARTER-CENTURY OF STEAM LOCOMOTIVES IN NORTH AMERICA


    [Illustration: Replica of the Lafayette (see p. 58) as it appeared
    in the fall of 1955, during the making of a motion picture in
    northern Georgia. For the picture, which was based on the story of
    the famous Civil War locomotive General (see p. 84), this “One-Armed
    Billy” of the 1830’s was disguised as the Yonah, of the Cooper Iron
    Works Rail Road, and is shown here as it was operating on the
    Tallulah Falls Railway. (_Color plate contributed by Thomas
    Norrell._)]


United States National Museum Bulletin 210

THE FIRST QUARTER-CENTURY OF STEAM LOCOMOTIVES IN NORTH AMERICA

Remaining Relics and Operable Replicas with a Catalog of
Locomotive Models in the U. S. National Museum

by

SMITH HEMPSTONE OLIVER

Curator of Land Transportation
United States National Museum


    [Illustration: FOR THE INCREASE AND DIFFUSION OF KNOWLEDGE AMONG MEN
    · SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTE · WASHINGTON · 1846]







Smithsonian Institution · Washington, D.C. · 1956




                             ADVERTISEMENT


The scientific publications of the National Museum include two series
known, respectively, as _Proceedings_ and _Bulletin_.

The _Proceedings_ series, begun in 1878, is intended primarily as a
medium for the publication of original papers based on the collections
of the National Museum, that set forth newly acquired facts in biology,
anthropology, and geology, with descriptions of new forms and revisions
of limited groups. Copies of each paper, in pamphlet form, are
distributed as published to libraries and scientific organizations and
to specialists and others interested in the different subjects. The
dates at which these separate papers are published are recorded in the
table of contents of each of the volumes.

The series of _Bulletins_, the first of which was issued in 1875,
contains separate publications comprising monographs of large zoological
groups and other general systematic treatises (occasionally in several
volumes), faunal works, reports of expeditions, catalogs of type
specimens, special collections, and other material of similar nature.
The majority of the volumes are octavo in size, but a quarto size has
been adopted in a few instances. In the _Bulletin_ series appear volumes
under the heading _Contributions from the United States National
Herbarium_, in octavo form, published by the National Museum since 1902,
which contain papers relating to the botanical collections of the
Museum.

The present work forms No. 210 of the _Bulletin_ series.

                                                      Remington Kellogg,
                            _Director_, _United States National Museum_.




                                CONTENTS


                                                                   _Page_
  Foreword: The vanishing iron horse                                    4
  Remaining relics and operable replicas representing the first
          quarter-century of steam locomotives in North America         6
      America’s first rail locomotive                                  10
      Two British-built locomotives                                    14
      Peter Cooper and Phineas Davis                                   22
      The West Point Foundry Association                               26
      National Museum’s John Bull                                      38
      Three Grasshoppers                                               47
      Two midwestern locomotives                                       53
      A One-Armed Billy                                                58
      A Rocket in America                                              60
      A Canadian relic                                                 63
      The final decade                                                 66
  Supplement: Models, in the National Museum, of locomotives not
          included in this work                                        75
  Picture credits                                                     104
  Acknowledgments                                                     105
  Bibliography                                                        106
  Index                                                               109




                                FOREWORD
                        The Vanishing Iron Horse


As the midpoint of the 20th century was reached, the curtain was falling
upon the final phases of steam locomotive operation in North America.
Almost certainly, after another decade there would remain in service
comparatively few representatives of the engine which had been the
primary source of motive power of the railroads for over a hundred
years.

In that comparatively short time the steam locomotive had changed the
United States from a small country with a few seaports, and with towns
and settlements little farther inland than river navigation permitted,
to a great nation covered with cities and spanning a continent. It had
made possible the confederation of the isolated provinces of Canada into
a great Dominion. Now, by the 1950’s, owing to the emergence of another
type of motive power, it had become obsolete and its days could be
numbered.

No future generation would experience the thrill enjoyed by its
predecessors. No future American could stand awed beside the track and
behold the majestic onrush of the iron horse, be deafened by the blast
of the exhaust, the crash and clatter of steel on steel, and the hiss of
escaping steam, or be momentarily shaken as the locomotive thundered
past in a blurred flash of connecting rods, valve mechanism, and
pounding wheels.

No child at night would ever again awaken to the eerie echo of a far-off
steam whistle crying at a lonely crossing, or by day look out from a
hillside at the long white plume of steam that marked a distant train
charging down the valley below. The present generation of Americans can
gaze back upon these things with nostalgia. The next will never know
them.

Here and there a steam engine will be saved, but the people of a
different era will note them and quickly pass on, wondering. Only a few
will pause to marvel and ponder over the development of the steam
locomotive.

It is to the everlasting credit of our forebears that some few examples
and relics of the early engines have been preserved; and the appearance
of this study of them, coming in the final hour of the steam locomotive,
is most appropriate. The author has gone to painstaking lengths to find
and sift and bring together the most complete record ever compiled of
these examples and relics remaining of the earliest of North American
railway engines and of working replicas of them.

Students of locomotive and railroad history are familiar with the almost
impossible task confronting the researcher who undertakes to trace the
history of early engines. The contemporary account is often a
will-o’-the-wisp pursued endlessly through the yellowed pages of
century-old newspapers and books; the seemingly authentic fragment of
fact is found to be faulty just when it seems flawlessly correct; the
colorful description of some ephemeral engine of the past just cannot be
reconciled with contemporary accounts and finally proves to have been
prepared long afterward, replete with the inaccuracies which most
unfortunately result from the inroads made by time upon the
recollections of the most careful observer.

Through all this confusing maze the author step by step has made his
way, the result being a most noteworthy and valuable contribution to the
literature of the steam locomotive. To students of its history, to the
vast body of railway enthusiasts all over the world, and to those
generally interested in the development of mechanical industry and
transportation, this work must appeal as unique and one that will be
long remembered.

                                                          THOMAS NORRELL

  _July 1955_
  Silver Spring, Maryland




     Remaining Relics and Operable Replicas Representing the First
         Quarter-Century Of Steam Locomotives in North America


 BUILDER          NAME             DATE BUILT FOR          CONDITION        SEE
                                  BUILT                                    PAGE
 Col. John        none             1825 Experiment         Relics and 2      10
  Stevens                                                   operable
                                                            replicas
 Robert           _America_        1828 Delaware and       Relics only       14
  Stephenson &                           Hudson Canal Co.
  Co.
 Foster,          _Stourbridge     1829 Delaware and       Assembled         14
  Rastrick and     Lion_                 Hudson Canal Co.   relics and
  Co.                                                       an operable
                                                            replica
 Peter Cooper     _Tom Thumb_      1830 Baltimore and      Operable          22
                                         Ohio Rail Road     replica
                                         Co.
 Phineas Davis    _York_           1831 Baltimore and      Operable          24
                                         Ohio Rail Road     replica
                                         Co.
 The West Point   _Best Friend     1830 South-Carolina     Operable          26
  Foundry          of                    Canal and          replica
  Association      Charleston_           Rail-Road Co.
 The West Point   _DeWitt          1831 Mohawk and Hudson  Relic and an      32
  Foundry          Clinton_              Rail Road Co.      operable
  Association                                               replica
 Robert           _John Bull_      1831 Camden and Amboy   Operable          38
  Stephenson &                           Rail Road and      original
  Co.                                    Transportation     and replica
                                         Co.
 Davis and        _John Quincy     1835 Baltimore and      Operable          47
  Gartner          Adams_                Ohio Rail Road     original
                                         Co.
 Davis and        _Andrew          1836 Baltimore and      Operable          47
  Gartner          Jackson_              Ohio Rail Road     original
                                         Co.
 Davis and        _John Hancock_   1836 Baltimore and      Operable          47
  Gartner                                Ohio Rail Road     original
                                         Co.
 Matthias W.      _Pioneer_        1836 Utica and          Operable          53
  Baldwin                                Schenectady Rail   original
                                         Road
 H. R. Dunham     _Mississippi_   about Name unknown       Operable          55
  and Co. (?)                      1836                     original
 William Norris   _Lafayette_      1837 Baltimore and      Operable          58
                                         Ohio Rail Road     replica
                                         Co.
 Braithwaite,     _Rocket_         1838 Philadelphia and   Operable          60
  Milner and Co.                         Reading Rail       original
                                         Road Co.
 Timothy          _Samson_         1838 General Mining     Operable          63
  Hackworth                              Association        original
 Builder unknown  _Peoples’       about Name unknown       Operable          67
                   Railway No.     1842                     original
                   3_
 Holmes Hinkley   _Lion_           1846 Machiasport        Operable          69
                                         Railroad           original
 New Castle       _Memnon_         1848 Baltimore and      Operable          71
  Manufacturing                          Ohio Rail Road     original
  Co.,                                   Co.
  sub-contractor
  to Matthias W.
  Baldwin

    [Illustration: Uncaptioned locomotive.]


Altogether, perhaps a quarter of a million steam locomotives have been
built in America. From the first they have been objects of interest to
young and old. They have been depicted and photographed untold times,
and as a result a wonderfully accurate pictorial record of their
construction and appearance has been built up.

The locomotives themselves, however, as they wore out or fell into
disuse were usually destroyed for the value of their scrap metal. This
process has been greatly hastened in recent years by the trend toward
the use of diesel-electric and other types of motive power. Few remain
of the busy multitudes of steam locomotives that served so well in
building the Nations on this continent. The picturesque and once popular
steamer has today become the vanishing iron horse.

It is proposed to deal here only with the relics and replicas of the
historic steam locomotives used during the pioneer days of railroading
on this continent, in the period 1825-1849. Of these, only 11 have
survived in even reasonably complete form. With the remaining parts of
several others, they are accounted museum treasures. Full sized operable
replicas of 7 other famous early locomotives have been constructed. All
these together afford a good idea of the actual construction of the
locomotives of long ago.

Not to be included, are the many nonoperable, wooden facsimiles of early
locomotives that merely serve to show the general external appearance of
the originals they represent. Many such are to be seen in the railroad
collection in the Baltimore and Ohio Transportation Museum located at
the old Mount Clare station and roundhouse at Baltimore, Md.

Also not to be included are the modern, full sized, operable replicas of
Robert Stephenson’s famous locomotive _Rocket_ of 1829, of which several
exist in the United States (one is in the Henry Ford Museum at Dearborn,
Mich., another is in the Museum of Science and Industry at Chicago,
Ill.). These replicas, built 100 years later by Robert Stephenson & Co.,
Ltd., of Darlington, England, do not represent a locomotive actually
used in North America during the pioneering days of railroading here,
and therefore do not fall into the category covered by this work.

Various old models of suggested designs for locomotives would not seem
to come within the scope of this publication either, as the full sized
versions never came into being. One such example is the model said to
have been built by John Fitch, and now exhibited in the Ohio State
Archaeological and Historical Society at Columbus, Ohio. As Fitch died
in July 1798, the model might, if authenticated as to builder and
purpose, be a very early example of an idea along the lines of a steam
locomotive.

On the other hand, there is no assurance that the model referred to was
intended by its builder to represent a locomotive. It is thought by most
historians that the model is that of a proposed power plant for a boat,
for Fitch is known to have constructed several successful steamboats a
few years before his death.


                    America’s First Rail Locomotive

Col. John Stevens of Hoboken, N. J., had by 1825 long been intrigued
with the idea of constructing a steam locomotive, having had
considerable success with steam as a method of propulsion on water. In
that year he constructed a small experimental 4-wheeled engine, the
first rail locomotive to be built in this country. The unflanged wheels
were kept on the flat rails by vertical bars that projected down from
each corner of the locomotive. These were fitted on their lower ends
with horizontal rollers bearing on the inside of the rails.

Equipped with a vertical water-tube boiler, and with its horizontal
1-cylinder power plant geared to a rack located between the two rails,
it was built only for demonstration and experimentation. It was often
run, however, on a small circular track laid out on the lower lawn of
Stevens’ estate at Hoboken. This was the first steam railroad in
America.

    [Illustration: Figure 1.—Original boiler, now in National Museum, of
    experimental locomotive built in 1825 by Col. John Stevens.]

Of this original locomotive only the boiler and safety valve remain.
They are on exhibition at the National Museum (USNM 180029), where they
were deposited in 1888 by the Stevens Institute of Technology. The
boiler (figure 1) contains 20 wrought-iron tubes, each a little over 1
inch in outside diameter, set closely together in a circle and
originally surrounding a circular grate, now missing. It is 4 feet high,
including the headers, and 1 foot across, and was formerly enclosed by a
jacket of thin sheet iron topped by a conical hood on which rested the
smokestack.

Wood used as fuel was dropped onto the grate through a door in the hood,
and water was put into the boiler through a pipe in the bottom header.
Steam was taken from a 1-inch pipe in the top header. The boiler when
new is reported to have sustained with safety a steam pressure of 550
pounds per square inch. The design of the boiler was patented by Stevens
on April 11, 1803.

The safety valve (figure 2) is of simple design. It consists of a lever
10 inches long from which a 4-pound lead ball about 2½ inches in
diameter is suspended. Beneath the lever, and about 1 inch in from the
fulcrum, is a disk valve controlled by the weight of the ball, which
hangs by a stirrup that can be moved to any of several notches, so that
it can be set for different pressures at which the valve will open.

    [Illustration: Figure 2.—Original safety valve of Stevens’
    locomotive, now in National Museum.]

A small, nonoperable model of the locomotive, about 2 feet long (figure
3), was made in the National Museum in 1898 (USNM 180241) and is
exhibited there. A full sized operable replica, constructed in 1928 at
the Altoona shops of the Pennsylvania Railroad Co., was demonstrated
(figure 4) at the Stevens Institute of Technology on November 23, 1928,
upon the occasion of the inauguration of Harvey N. Davis as president of
the Institute. It was given by the Pennsylvania Railroad to the Museum
of Science and Industry at Chicago in 1932, where it is now exhibited.

Another replica of the Stevens locomotive, made by the Pennsylvania in
1939, appeared in the railroad pageant at the New York World’s Fair in
1939 and 1940, and for a time in 1941 was exhibited at the Pennsylvania
Station in New York City. In June 1941 it was placed on exhibition in
the museum of Stevens Institute, where it remained until March 1943. At
that time it was returned to the Pennsylvania Railroad Co., and has
since been stored in their enginehouse at Trenton, N. J.

    [Illustration: Figure 3.—Model of Stevens’ locomotive, in National
    Museum. The boiler is shown outside the sheet-metal shell which
    normally surrounds it.]

    [Illustration: Figure 4.—Full sized operable replica of Stevens’
    locomotive, built in 1928 by Pennsylvania Railroad Co., being
    demonstrated at Hoboken, N. J., on November 23, 1928.]

The design of these replicas is based in part on the recollections in
the 1880’s of the grandson of John Stevens, Dr. Francis B. Stevens, who
was a frequent passenger on the original locomotive in 1825 at the age
of 11. These recollections are contained in letters from Dr. Stevens to
J. Elfreth Watkins, onetime curator of transportation and engineering of
the National Museum. Stevens’ letters, dated March 30, 1883, January 17,
1888, and November 19, 1892, are now in the archives of the Museum.


                     Two British-Built Locomotives

The next locomotives known to have been used in this country were the
British machines today popularly referred to as the _America_ (figure 5)
and the _Stourbridge Lion_ (figure 6). They were contracted for in
England in 1828 by Horatio Allen, who had been sent there for that
purpose by the Delaware and Hudson Canal Co., and were delivered at New
York City in 1829.

The _America_, built by the already famous British firm of Robert
Stephenson & Co., of Newcastle-upon-Tyne, arrived from London on the
ship _Columbia_ on January 15. The _Stourbridge Lion_, built by Foster,
Rastrick and Co., of Stourbridge, arrived from Liverpool on the _John
Jay_ on May 13. The delivered price of the former was $3,663.30 and of
the latter $2,914.90. On July 2 they were shipped up the Hudson River by
the steamboat _Congress_ to Rondout, N. Y., where they arrived on July
3.

    [Illustration: Uncaptioned locomotive.]

    [Illustration: Figure 5.—Early drawing of _America_, built by
    Stephenson in England in 1828.]

    [Illustration: Figure 6.—Drawing of _Stourbridge Lion_ of 1829
    appearing in Renwick’s “Treatise on the Steam Engine,” published in
    1830 (notice that crank rings are not shown). The track shown is not
    the type upon which the locomotive ran at Honesdale, Pa.]

Later in July the two locomotives were sent up the Delaware and Hudson
Canal from Eddyville, N. Y., to Honesdale, Pa., where the _Stourbridge
Lion_ was subsequently tried out on the newly laid railroad tracks of
the Canal company. The tests on August 8, and again on September 9, with
Horatio Allen at the controls, showed that although the performance of
the locomotive was satisfactory, the track was not sufficiently stable
to withstand the weight of the relatively large machine. As a result of
this failure, horses and steam- or water-powered stationary engines (see
figure 7) constituted the motive power of this railroad until 1860.

The _Stourbridge Lion_, nevertheless, had earned the distinction of
being the first locomotive to operate in America on a railroad built
expressly for commercial traffic.

No record exists to show that the _America_ was ever used, and its
subsequent history as a locomotive is unknown. Two other locomotives
were built by Foster, Rastrick and Co. for the Delaware and Hudson Canal
Co. As these were not delivered to Rondout until after the _Lion_ had
demonstrated the inadequacy of the track at Honesdale, they were not
sent there, but were instead stored at Rondout, where all trace of them
has been lost. It is thought they were destroyed by fire while in
storage.

    [Illustration: Figure 7.—Combining different methods of
    transportation was common practice in the early days of railroading.
    The Delaware and Hudson as late as 1866, for example, carried coal
    by rail from the mines of Scranton and Carbondale, Pa., to its canal
    at Honesdale, Pa., and thence on barges by way of Port Jervis,
    Ellenville, and Rondout, N. Y., to New York City. On some early
    railroads, horses drew the cars on level stretches, but in hilly
    country where grades were very steep, gravity roads with switchbacks
    and inclined planes were often used. The inclined plane consisted of
    a set of rails over which units of the train could be raised or
    lowered by mechanical means. Horses, water power, or a stationary
    steam engine, often located at the top of the slope, were among the
    sources of power.]

In 1890, Lindsay and Early of Carbondale, Pa., deposited one of the two
cylinders (figure 8) of the _America_ in the National Museum (USNM
180922). It has a 9-inch bore and a 24-inch stroke, and the piston
(figure 9) is fitted with two compression rings. (The location of the
other cylinder is today unknown.)

Earlier, in 1888, the Delaware and Hudson Canal Co. had given to the
Museum several locomotive parts, all thought to have been from the
_Stourbridge Lion_. It has been established, however, through
correspondence with E. A. Forward, formerly of the Science Museum, South
Kensington, London, and with the firm of Robert Stephenson & Hawthorns,
Ltd., that the three crank rings (USNM 180030-C) received at that time
are actually relics of the _America_.

    [Illustration: Figure 8.—Cylinder of _America_, in National Museum.]

    [Illustration: Figure 9.—Piston from cylinder, at about twice the
    scale of figure 8.]

    [Illustration: Figure 10.—Walking beams of _Stourbridge Lion_, in
    National Museum.]

    [Illustration: Figure 11.—_Stourbridge Lion_ partially reassembled
    from original parts in National Museum. Frame and wheels are not
    original, and the crank rings are undoubtedly from the _America_.]

Other definite relics of the _Lion_ received from the Delaware and
Hudson Canal Co. in 1888, from Lindsay and Early in 1890, from G. T.
Slade in 1901, and from Mrs. Townsend Poore of Scranton, Pa., in 1913,
include the boiler, one of the two cylinders, the two 6-foot-long
walking beams (figure 10), and the 48-inch-diameter flanged metal tires
of the four driving wheels.[1] These parts, with the exception of the
walking beams, were many years ago reassembled at the National Museum
into a reconstructed version showing somewhat the original appearance of
the locomotive (figure 11).

    [Illustration: Figure 12.—Model of _Stourbridge Lion_, in National
    Museum.]

    [Illustration: Figure 13.—Full sized operable replica of
    _Stourbridge Lion_, built in 1932 by Delaware and Hudson Railroad
    Corp.]

At that time, the three crank rings from the wheels of the _America_,
together with a fourth, duplicate ring made at the time of the
reassembly, were unwittingly incorporated in the reconstruction. It is
this version of the _Stourbridge Lion_ that is now on exhibition. The
gauge of the reassembly, furthermore, is 56½ inches, while that of the
original is recorded as 51 inches.

Also exhibited in the National Museum is a small nonoperable model (USNM
215649) of the _Stourbridge Lion_ with its tender, together about 2 feet
long (figure 12), made by C. R. Luscombe in 1901 and rebuilt by Paul E.
Garber in 1920.

    [Illustration: Figure 14.—Replica of _Stourbridge Lion_ at New York
    World’s Fair, May 20, 1939.]

A full sized operable replica (figure 13) was constructed in 1932 by the
Delaware and Hudson Railroad Corp. and lent by them to the Wayne County
Historical Society at Honesdale, Pa. The cylinder bore of the replica is
⁷/₁₆ inches, the stroke 36 inches. Since the outside dimensions of the
original cylinder are approximately those of the replica, its working
dimensions are probably also the same.

From time to time the replica has appeared in various railroad pageants,
including those at the Chicago World’s Fair in 1933 and 1934, the New
York World’s Fair in 1939 (figure 14) and 1940, and the Chicago Railroad
Fair in 1948. Otherwise, it can be seen on exhibition at Honesdale, the
scene of the trials of the original _Stourbridge Lion_.


                     Peter Cooper and Phineas Davis

No original parts remain of one of the best known early locomotives, the
_Tom Thumb_. A full sized operable replica (figure 15), however, was
made in 1926 by the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad Co. for use in their
exhibit that year at the Philadelphia Sesqui-Centennial International
Exposition. It has since appeared at the Fair of the Iron Horse, held at
Halethorpe, near Baltimore, in the fall of 1927, the Chicago World’s
Fair in 1933 and 1934, the New York World’s Fair in 1939 and 1940, and
the Chicago Railroad Fair in 1948 and 1949. Its permanent home is in
Baltimore, at the Baltimore and Ohio Transportation Museum.

A small nonoperable model of the _Tom Thumb_, about 2 feet long (figure
16), made in the National Museum in 1890 (USNM 204581), is exhibited in
the collection of the Museum. Other small models of it appear in the B &
O Museum. One of these, a ¼-inch-scale model recently made under the
direction of Lawrence W. Sagle of the B & O Museum, differs somewhat
from the usually accepted idea of the _Tom Thumb_.

Notably, the smokestack is not straight, but has an elbow at its upper
end, and the belt-driven blower is located there rather than on the
floor of the machine as in the replica and the other models. Peter
Cooper, the New York engineer and inventor who constructed the original
_Tom Thumb_ as an experiment in the winter of 1829-1830, mentioned this
upper location of the blower in a speech delivered many years later, in
1875, and quoted in Bulletin 73 of the Railway and Locomotive Historical
Society (1948, pp. 50-52).

The little locomotive, with its vertical boiler made of rifle barrels,
looked rather like the larger locomotive of John Stevens of only several
years earlier but had considerably smaller wheels, these being only 30
inches in diameter.

Although a 3¼-inch bore for its vertical 1-cylinder engine is given by
most writers, Jonathan Knight, chief engineer of the Baltimore and Ohio,
in the fourth annual report of the company (for 1830, p. 35) gives the
figure as 3½. Unfortunately, he does not mention the stroke, which is
usually given elsewhere as either 14¼ or 14½ inches. The bore and stroke
of the replica were made 5 and 27 inches so as to give it sufficient
power to operate satisfactorily. For that matter, in the interest of
sturdiness and suitable operation the replica is somewhat larger in all
respects and considerably heavier than the original. It operates on a
steam pressure of 90 pounds per square inch, and it is reported that the
original did likewise.

    [Illustration: Figure 15.—Full sized operable replica of Cooper’s
    _Tom Thumb_, built in 1926 by Baltimore and Ohio Railroad Co. (PETER
    COOPER’S “TOM THUMB” 1829-30 BALTIMORE & OHIO R.R.)]

    [Illustration: Figure 16.—Model of _Tom Thumb_, in National Museum.]

The _Tom Thumb_ was engaged in its famous race with the horse-drawn
railroad car in the summer of 1830 on a parallel section of the new
13-mile stretch of track between Baltimore and Ellicott’s Mills. It
covered the 13 miles between the Mount Clare station and Ellicott’s
Mills in a little over an hour, and the return trip in 57 minutes. The
race with the horse-drawn car took place during the return trip. The
_Tom Thumb_ appeared to be a certain winner until temporary slipping of
the belt driving the blower caused the steam pressure to drop and
allowed the horse to become the victor.

Nevertheless, the _Tom Thumb_ by this and later trips in the same year
proved that steam locomotives were practicable, and caused the railroad
officials to announce on January 4, 1831, a proposed contest (to be
somewhat similar to the famous Rainhill Trials held in October 1829 in
England) in which the best locomotive demonstrated would be purchased by
the Baltimore and Ohio Rail Road Co. for the sum of $4,000.

The winner of this contest, the _York_, a vertical-boiler locomotive
built in early 1831 by Phineas Davis, a former watchmaker of York, Pa.,
is in the same category as the _Tom Thumb_, not only in that no original
parts survive, but also in that a full sized operable replica of it
(figure 17) has been constructed. This was built by the Baltimore and
Ohio in 1927 for use in the Fair of the Iron Horse. It also appeared at
the Chicago World’s Fair in 1933 and 1934, after which it was presented
to the Museum of Science and Industry at Chicago, where it has since
remained.

The original _York_ was used successfully on the run between Baltimore
and Ellicott’s Mills, and subsequently on the much longer run of some 40
miles between Baltimore and the inclined planes at Parr’s Ridge, on the
way to Frederick Town and Point of Rocks, Md. (Horse power was used to
raise the cars at Parr’s Ridge in 1832.)

    [Illustration: Figure 17.—Full sized operable replica of Davis’
    _York_, built in 1927 by Baltimore and Ohio Railroad Co. (YORK 1831
     BALTIMORE & OHIO)]

As the first practical and generally serviceable locomotive of the early
Baltimore and Ohio Railroad, the _York_ influenced considerably the
design of the company’s subsequent locomotives. Within a year Davis had
constructed several locomotives of a generally similar design, all with
vertical boilers (see p. 47).

The _York_ had wheels 30 inches in diameter, weighed about 3½ tons, and
had a top speed of 30 miles an hour. Not long after its construction, it
was drastically altered in design and appearance. The vertical cylinders
were removed from the opposite sides of the boiler, where they had
operated the four wheels by means of direct-acting rods and trussed side
bars, and inclined adjacent cylinders were located behind the boiler,
where they operated by means of gearing on the rear axle only.

The modern replica, however, represents the _York_ as it was originally
designed and constructed. It operates on a steam pressure of 115 pounds
per square inch. The original is said to have operated on 100 pounds per
square inch, and it burned anthracite coal, a very early use of that
fuel in locomotives.


                   The West Point Foundry Association

    [Illustration: Figure 18.—Early drawing of _Best Friend of
    Charleston_, built in 1830.]

The scene is now shifted to South Carolina and New York. The West Point
Foundry Association, situated in New York City, had been the location of
a stationary demonstration under steam of the blocked-up _Stourbridge
Lion_ on May 28, 1829, shortly after it was unloaded from the ship that
brought it from Liverpool. The Association soon thereafter built a
locomotive (figure 18) for the South-Carolina Canal and Rail-Road Co.,
which was building a line from Charleston to Hamburg, S. C., just across
the Savannah River from Augusta, Ga. Prior to its adoption of the steam
locomotive, the railroad had used horses to draw its cars, and had even
experimented with a wind-propelled sail car.

The locomotive, the _Best Friend of Charleston_, which was to become the
first to operate on a regularly scheduled run in this country, was
constructed at a cost of $4,000 in the summer of 1830, and arrived at
Charleston on October 23 of that year, on the ship _Niagara_. The same
Horatio Allen who had tested the _Stourbridge Lion_ for the Delaware and
Hudson had become chief engineer of the South-Carolina Canal and
Rail-Road Co. and was one of those responsible for the plans of the
_Best Friend_.

Local machinists at Charleston were hired to reassemble the locomotive
and prepare it for its first trial, but when the run was made on
November 2, 1830, the wheels were discovered to be unsatisfactory. They
were replaced by sturdier ones, and following a subsequent test on
December 9, the locomotive was accepted. After several more experimental
runs, some with passengers, the official first run, carrying 141
persons, finally took place on Christmas Day 1830.

Notice of the coming event had been published the previous day, so it
became the first steam railroad train run scheduled by “timetable” to be
made in the Western Hemisphere. All previous locomotive operations on
this side of the Atlantic had been purely experimental—for test or
demonstration purposes. At the time of this run the tracks of the
railroad extended only about 6 miles out of Charleston, but by October
3, 1833, the full 136 miles to Hamburg had been completed. The
South-Carolina Canal and Rail-Road was then the longest continuous
railroad in the world (see figure 19).

A description of the _Best Friend_ by David Matthew, who in 1830 had
been foreman of the West Point Foundry Association, is contained in a
letter he wrote in 1859 to the historian William H. Brown. Later quoted
by Brown in his “History of the First Locomotives in America,” the
letter says in part:

  The _Best Friend_ was a four-wheel engine, all four wheels drivers.
  Two inclined cylinders at an angle, working down on a double crank,
  inside of the frame, with the wheels outside of the frame, each wheel
  connecting together outside, with outside rods. The wheels were iron
  hub, wooden spokes and felloes, with iron tire, and iron web and pins
  in the wheels to connect the outside rods to.

  The boiler was a vertical one, in form of an old-fashioned
  porter-bottle, the furnace at the bottom surrounded with water, and
  all filled inside full of what we called teats, running out from the
  sides and top, with alternate stays to support the crown of the
  furnace; the smoke and gas passing out through the sides at several
  points, into an outside jacket; which had the chimney on it. The
  boiler sat on a frame upon four wheels, with the connecting-rods
  running by it to come into the crankshaft. The cylinders were about
  six inches in the bore, and sixteen inches’ stroke. Wheels about four
  and a half feet in diameter. The whole machine weighed about four and
  a half tons.

    [Illustration: Figure 19.—In 1833 the South-Carolina Canal and
    Rail-Road was the longest continuous railroad in the world.]

    [Illustration: Figure 20.—Old locomotive wheel at Redwood Library,
    Newport, R. I., claimed to be “wheel of first locomotive used on
    first railroad of any length in America,—Charleston, S. C., to
    Augusta, Ga., 1835.”]

The _Best Friend_, as such, was short-lived. It gave service that was
entirely satisfactory up to the moment its boiler exploded on June 17,
1831, when one of the helpers on the locomotive deliberately held the
safety valve closed.

According to the statement in 1869 of Nicholas W. Darrell, first
engineer of the _Best Friend_ and later superintendent of machinery of
the South-Carolina Canal and Rail-Road, the salvageable parts were used
in constructing another locomotive which was appropriately named the
_Phoenix_. Darrell’s recollection is confirmed by the early reports of
the company, which also reveal that the machinery and new boiler were
arranged differently on the _Phoenix_, the cylinders being placed
outside the frame, and the weight being much more evenly distributed.
The _Phoenix_ was put in service on October 18, 1832.

Although no documented relics of either of these two locomotives remain,
the Redwood Library at Newport, R. I., now exhibits an all-metal wheel
(figure 20) claimed to be from the “first locomotive used on first
railroad of any length in America. Charleston, S. C., to Augusta, Ga.,
1835.” Quite probably it is a replacement wheel from the _Phoenix_, for
Darrell also stated in 1869 that cast wheels with wrought tires were
used to replace the original wooden wheels with iron tires that were on
the _Best Friend_ when it was salvaged to construct the _Phoenix_.

    [Illustration: Figure 21.—Full sized operable replica of _Best
    Friend of Charleston_, built in 1928 by Southern Railway System.]

The wheel at Newport is built up of parts, and consists of a large round
hub, 12 round 1¼-inch-diameter spokes, a rim approximately 46 inches in
diameter and 4½ inches wide, and a flanged tire 4¾ inches wide and about
1 inch thick, the flange of which is 2 inches wide on its outside face.
The wheel, therefore, has a diameter of about 48 inches. The spokes are
staggered in the hub and appear to be fastened to it by threaded nuts.
Four keyways are cut into the hole in the hub. The complete history and
exact origin of this wheel, given to the Redwood Library in January 1863
by Isaac P. Hazard of Newport, will probably remain a mystery.

As with other early locomotives, a full sized operable replica of the
_Best Friend_ has been built. The Southern Railway System, which now
includes the old South-Carolina Canal and Rail-Road, in 1928 constructed
a faithful replica of the locomotive at its Birmingham, Ala., shops, and
in the same year reproduced the original tender and several cars at its
shops at Hayne, S. C. (figure 21). A new boiler was installed on the
replica in 1948.

Among the various fairs at which it has been exhibited are those held at
New York in 1939 and 1940 and in Chicago in 1948 and 1949. At present it
is to be seen in the depot of the Chattanooga Station Co. at
Chattanooga, Tenn.

A small, nonoperable model of the _Best Friend_, about 2 feet long
(figure 22), with tender and two cars, was made in the late 1880’s by D.
Ballauf, well known model maker of Washington, D. C. It was first
exhibited at the Cincinnati Centennial Exposition in 1888, after which
it was placed on exhibition in the National Museum (USNM 180244).

Of the _West Point_, the second locomotive built by the West Point
Foundry Association, and the second bought by the South-Carolina Canal
and Rail-Road Co., no relics or replicas are known to exist. A
satisfactory locomotive, it arrived at Charleston on the ship
_Lafayette_ on February 28, 1831. Its final disposition is no longer
known.

    [Illustration: Figure 22.—Model of _Best Friend of Charleston_, in
    National Museum.]

    [Illustration: Figure 23.—Early drawing of _De Witt Clinton_, built
    in 1831.]

The third locomotive (figure 23) built by the West Point Foundry
Association, the _De Wilt Clinton_ of the Mohawk and Hudson Rail Road
Co., was the first to run in New York State. Its first public
demonstration was an excursion trip on August 9, 1831, on a 12-mile
stretch of railway between Albany and Schenectady. The distance was
covered in less than one hour. Another notable demonstration, attended
by many public officials, took place on September 24 of the same year.

The locomotive, which had been shipped up the Hudson River to Albany
during the last week of June with David Matthew in charge, weighed a
little over 6,750 pounds, was 11½ feet long, and was mounted on four
54-inch wheels, all of which were drivers. The two cylinders, at the
rear of the locomotive and connected to the axle of the front wheels,
had a bore of 5½ inches and a stroke of 16 inches. The boiler was
tubular, with copper tubes about 2½ inches in diameter and 6 feet long.
The top speed when pulling a load of about 8 tons was said to have been
about 30 miles an hour.

    [Illustration: Figure 24.—Wheel, said to be from original _De Witt
    Clinton_, in National Museum.]

The _De Witt Clinton_ was never completely satisfactory, and after
infrequent use in 1831 and 1832 it was disassembled and disposed of
piece by piece. Some of the parts were listed as sold on April 20, 1835,
others on September 13 and October 29, 1836. A total of $485 was
realized from the various sales.

In 1891, a wheel said to have been one of the wheels of the original _De
Witt Clinton_, was deposited in the National Museum (USNM 180947) by
William Buchanan, at that time superintendent of motive power of the New
York Central and Hudson River Railroad Co. The all-metal wheel (figure
24) contains 14 round, 1-inch-diameter spokes staggered around the hub,
and is 52½ inches in diameter. The flanged metal tire is missing from
the rim, which is 4⅛ inches wide, but its presence would undoubtedly
bring the overall diameter of the wheel up to 54 inches.

    [Illustration: Figure 25.—Full sized operable replica of _De Witt
    Clinton_, built in 1893 by New York Central and Hudson River
    Railroad Co., at World’s Columbian Exposition, in Chicago, in 1893.]

    [Illustration: Figure 26.—Replica of _De Witt Clinton_ photographed
    during an appearance in 1921.]

This wheel, or an identical one, was used in the very early 1890’s by
the New York Central and Hudson River Railroad Co. as a guide in their
construction of the full sized operable replica of the _De Witt Clinton_
locomotive, tender, and cars, first shown at the World’s Columbian
Exposition at Chicago in 1893 (figure 25). The replica, constructed from
the original plans of 1831, was made at the railroad’s shops at West
Albany, N. Y. During the past 60 years the replica has undergone a
number of repair operations, but it remains authentic. It has been
exhibited on many occasions (figure 26).

Since the 1893 unveiling of the replica of the train at Chicago, it has
been displayed at the Louisiana Purchase Exposition at St. Louis in
1904, the Fair of the Iron Horse (figure 27), the Chicago World’s Fair
in 1933 and 1934, the New York World’s Fair in 1939 and 1940, the
Chicago Railroad Fair in 1948 and 1949, and on many other occasions. For
years the train was exhibited on a balcony within New York City’s Grand
Central Terminal, but since 1935 it has been on loan from the New York
Central System to the Henry Ford Museum at Dearborn.

An exquisitely made nonoperable model of the _De Witt Clinton_, its
tender, and three cars, together about 3 feet long (figure 28), was made
in 1932 by Peyton L. Morgan of Lynchburg, Va., and has been since 1935
in the collection of the National Museum (USNM 310961).

    [Illustration: Figure 27.—Replica of _De Witt Clinton_ at the Fair
    of the Iron Horse in 1927.]

    [Illustration: Figure 28.—Model of _De Witt Clinton_, in National
    Museum.]


                      National Museum’s John Bull

    [Illustration: Figure 29.—Pre-1900 photo of _John Bull_, oldest
    complete and operable locomotive in North America, now in National
    Museum.]

Probably the most famous and historic old locomotive in the United
States today is the _John Bull_, the oldest complete and operable
locomotive in the country (figure 29). Built in England in 1831 by
Robert Stephenson & Co. of Newcastle-upon-Tyne, it was officially placed
in service on November 12, 1831, at Bordentown, N. J., on the lines of
the Camden and Amboy Rail Road and Transportation Co., now a part of the
Pennsylvania Railroad Co. In regular service until 1865, the locomotive
was given by the Pennsylvania Railroad Co. to the National Museum in
1885 (USNM 180001). It should not be confused with another
Stephenson-built locomotive of the same name, built for the Mohawk and
Hudson Rail Road Co. at the same time but no longer in existence.

The Camden and Amboy’s _John Bull_, its first locomotive, was ordered
from Stephenson by Robert L. Stevens of New Jersey, son of the railroad
pioneer Col. John Stevens, and president of the company, who had gone to
England in October 1830 for this purpose, as well as to purchase iron
rails of his design for the track of the new railroad.

The locomotive was completed early in the summer of 1831 and was shipped
from Liverpool on the ship _Allegheny_, which sailed for Philadelphia on
July 14. It had been disassembled for shipping, as were most of the
early locomotives, and it is interesting to note that the freight charge
was only £19, or a little under $100. The total cost of the locomotive,
incidentally, was £784 7s. 0d., or a little under $4,000.

The engine arrived at Philadelphia about the middle of August, and was
then transshipped by sloop to Bordentown, near Trenton, whence a few
miles of rail were soon to head northeastward toward South Amboy. The
mechanics who assembled the locomotive found it a mysterious and
completely unfamiliar device. After considerable experimentation the
task was successfully accomplished under the leadership of Isaac Dripps,
a local youth who later rose to a position of importance in the
Pennsylvania Railroad.

In its first test the locomotive was fired up to 30 pounds steam
pressure, and Dripps, with Stevens by his side, opened the throttle of
the first locomotive of what was to become part of the Pennsylvania
Railroad Co. The engine was disassembled for a few minor modifications
shortly after this trial, and a few weeks later, on November 12, the
official first trip was made.

The _John Bull_ as it appeared when first placed in service in 1831 was
described in detail by J. Elfreth Watkins in his “Camden and Amboy
Railroad,” published in 1891. He wrote:

  The engine originally weighed about ten tons. The boiler was thirteen
  feet long and three feet six inches in diameter. The cylinders were
  nine inches by twenty inches. There were four driving wheels four feet
  six inches in diameter, arranged with outside cranks for connecting
  parallel rods, but owing to the sharp curves on the road these rods
  were never used. The driving wheels were made with cast-iron hubs and
  wooden (locust) spokes and felloes. The tires were of wrought iron,
  three-quarters of an inch thick, the tread being five inches and the
  depth of flange one and a-half inches. The gauge was originally five
  feet from center to center of rails. The boiler was composed of
  sixty-two flues seven feet six inches long, two inches in diameter;
  the furnace was three feet seven inches long and three feet two inches
  high, for burning wood. The steam ports were one and one-eighth inches
  by six and a-half inches; the exhaust ports one and one-eighth by six
  and a-half inches; grate surface, ten feet eight inches; fire-box
  surface, thirty-six feet; flue surface, two hundred and thirteen feet;
  weight, without fuel or water, twenty-two thousand four hundred and
  twenty-five pounds.

  After the valves were in gear and the engine in motion, two levers on
  the engineman’s side moved back and forth continuously. When it was
  necessary to put the locomotive on the turn-table, enginemen who were
  skilled in the handling of the engines first put the valves out of
  gear by turning the handle down, and then worked the levers by hand,
  thus moving the valves to the proper position and stopping the engine
  at the exact point desired.

  The reversing gear was a very complicated affair. The two eccentrics
  were secured to a sleeve or barrel, which fitted loosely on the
  crank-shaft, between the two cranks, so as to turn freely. A treadle
  was used to change the position of this loose eccentric sleeve on the
  shaft of the driving wheel (moving it to the right or left) when it
  was necessary to reverse. Two carriers were secured firmly to the body
  of this shaft (one on each side of the eccentrics); one carrier worked
  the engine ahead, the other back. The small handle on the right side
  of the boiler was used to lift the eccentric-rod (which passed forward
  to the rock shaft on the forward part of the engine) off the pin, and
  thus put the valves out of gear before it was possible to shift the
  sleeve and reverse the engine.

  As no tender came with the locomotive, one was improvised from a
  four-wheel flat car that had been used on construction work, which was
  soon equipped to carry water and wood. The water tank consisted of a
  large whiskey cask which was procured from a Bordentown storekeeper,
  and this was securely fastened on the center of this four-wheeled car.
  A hole was bored up through the car into the barrel and into it a
  piece of two-inch tin pipe was fastened, projecting below the platform
  of the car. It now became necessary to devise some plan to get the
  water from the tank to the pump and into the boiler around the turns
  under the cars, and as a series of rigid sections of pipe was not
  practicable, young Dripps procured four sections of hose two feet
  long, which he had made out of shoe leather by a Bordentown shoemaker.
  These were attached to the pipes and securely fastened by bands of
  waxed thread. The hogshead was filled with water, a supply of wood for
  fuel was obtained, and the engine and tender were ready for work.

The distance between the two main axles on the locomotive is just 5
feet, and the gauge is 56½ inches. The overall length of the locomotive,
including the pilot, is 25 feet; of the tender, 12 feet.

Watkins has given the cylinder bore as 9 inches, a figure also used by
C. F. Dendy Marshall in his “Two Essays in Early Locomotive History,”
and by J. G. H. Warren in his “A Century of Locomotive Building,” both
excellent publications. In fact, however, the cylinder bore of the _John
Bull_ was recently measured and found to be 11 inches. The stroke of 20
inches as cited by all is correct.

    [Illustration: Figure 30.—Another pre-1900 view of _John Bull_,
    which was built in England by Stephenson in 1831.]

Many changes, some minor and some major, were incorporated in the _John
Bull_ during the next few years. The most noticeable was the addition of
a 2-wheeled pilot, suggested in 1832 by Robert L. Stevens to guide the
locomotive around the sharp curves common in the tracks of that era. In
order to attach the pilot to the front axle, the outside rods and cranks
connecting the front and back axles had to be permanently removed, thus
reducing the number of drivers from four to two. The _John Bull_ has
ever since been driven by only the two rear wheels (figure 30). The
wheels of the pilot are 29 inches in diameter.

Another early permanent change was the replacement of the wooden-spoked
wheels with those of cast iron. The old wooden carriage-type wheels
could not stand up under service in America, where sharp curves in the
tracks prevailed. A wheel, said to be one of the originals (figure 31)
but lacking the flanged metal tire, was presented to the National Museum
(USNM 181194) by the Pennsylvania Railroad Co. in 1894. An inch or so
less in diameter than 54 inches, the wheel would certainly be of the
original size if the tire were in place. The 14 spokes and the felloe
are of wood. Metal bands, similar to the crank rings of the _America_
(now affixed to the reconstructed wheels of the restored _Stourbridge
Lion_, see p. 20), are included in the construction of this old wheel of
the _John Bull_.

    [Illustration: Figure 31.—Original wooden-spoked wheel of _John
    Bull_, in National Museum.]

Whether or not it is one of the original wheels applied to the
locomotive by Stephenson can not at this time be definitely proved.
Possibly it is an early wooden-spoked wheel built and tried by the
Camden and Amboy prior to the adoption of the all-metal wheels now on
the locomotive. Another similar wheel, until recently located in the
Pennsylvania’s library in its Suburban Station Building in Philadelphia,
is now in storage. These two wheels were included in that railroad’s
exhibit at the World’s Columbian Exposition in 1893.

Among the many other changes to the _John Bull_ were the addition of a
bell, a whistle, and a headlight, as well as a dial-type steam pressure
gauge (figure 32), and the relocation of the axle springs, the water
cocks, the safety valve, and the steam dome. At one time a cab was
installed at the rear of the locomotive, and an 8-wheeled tender was in
use (figure 33).

The tender as seen today is basically original, but much of the woodwork
was in such poor repair that it was completely disassembled in 1910 and
stored, the rotted pieces of wood being discarded. In 1930 the tender
was completely restored at the Altoona shops of the Pennsylvania
Railroad Co., and since that time has been exhibited constantly with the
locomotive.

    [Illustration: Figure 32.—_John Bull_ on display in National Museum.
    Note controls and modern steam pressure gauge.]

Prior to its presentation to the National Museum, the _John Bull_ had
appeared at the Centennial Exhibition at Philadelphia in 1876, and at
the Exposition of Railway Appliances at Chicago in 1883. In early 1893,
the locomotive and tender were taken from Washington to New York City,
and on April 17 proceeded under steam, pulling two old cars of the
period of 1836 (figure 34), to the World’s Columbian Exposition at
Chicago. It arrived without mishap on April 22 after having covered 912
miles. The locomotive and tender were returned to the Museum in December
1893 after having made daily demonstration runs at the exposition. They
returned to Washington under steam via Pittsburgh, Altoona, Harrisburg,
and Baltimore. The next time the locomotive left the Museum’s confines
was for a brief sojourn at the Fair of the Iron Horse in 1927 (figure
35). More recently it appeared at the Chicago World’s Fair in 1933 and
the New York World’s Fair in 1939 and 1940.

In early 1940, a full sized operable replica of the _John Bull_
locomotive (figure 36) was made at the Altoona shops of the Pennsylvania
Railroad Co. The cylinder dimensions of 11 by 20 inches were apparently
known by the shops at that time, as the drawings made then for use in
building the replica show the bore and stroke to be 10⅞ by 20 inches.
Perhaps the bore of the original locomotive was also 10⅞ inches in 1831,
and was increased to 11 inches through many years of wear. However, the
figure of 9 inches for the bore, so often used in the past, is
definitely incorrect.

    [Illustration: Figure 33.—As this early photo shows, the _John Bull_
    toward the end of its active career had a cab and large smokestack,
    and an 8-wheeled tender was used.]

    [Illustration: Figure 34.—_John Bull_, with train of 1836-period
    cars, en route to World’s Columbian Exposition at Chicago in 1893.]

    [Illustration: Figure 35.—Original _John Bull_, with replica of
    tender built in 1927, at the Fair of the Iron Horse, October 5,
    1927.]

    [Illustration: Figure 36.—Full sized operable replica of _John
    Bull_, built in 1940 by Pennsylvania Railroad Co.]

    [Illustration: Figure 37.—Model of _John Bull_ and tender, in
    National Museum, showing appearance of original 1831 design. Note
    side rod connecting the two axles.]

Earlier, in 1927, a full sized replica of the tender had been
constructed at Altoona. This replica of the tender appeared with the
original locomotive at the Fair of the Iron Horse in 1927, but since
1930 the restored original tender has always appeared with the original
locomotive. In 1940, the replica of the locomotive, accompanied by the
replica of the tender, appeared at the New York World’s Fair as a moving
exhibit, while the original locomotive and tender appeared there as a
stationary exhibit. The replica again appeared at the Chicago Railroad
Fair in both 1948 and 1949. When not on exhibition, the replica is
usually stored at the Pennsylvania’s enginehouse at Northumberland, Pa.

A small, nonoperable model of the _John Bull_ and its tender (figure
37), with two of the cars of the 1831 period, together about 6½ feet
long, was made in the National Museum by C. R. Luscombe about 1900, and
is included in the Museum’s collection (USNM 233510). The units are
represented as the originals appeared in 1831, without the pilot on the
locomotive, and without the sides and top on the tender.


                           Three Grasshoppers

As a result of the success of Phineas Davis’ _York_ on the Baltimore and
Ohio (see p. 24), about 18 more small locomotives with vertical boilers
were built for the B & O between 1832 and 1837, the first few by
Davis[2] and his partner Israel Gartner,[3] several by Charles Reeder,
and the remainder by George Gillingham and Ross Winans. These machines,
with their vertical cylinders and their walking beams, earned the name
“grasshopper” because of their peculiar appearance when under way.

Of the many “grasshoppers” constructed, three have survived. The
earliest, the _John Quincy Adams_, was built in July 1835 and is now
exhibited in Carillon Park at Dayton, Ohio, where it has been for
several years, the gift of the Baltimore and Ohio. The remaining two,
the _Andrew Jackson_ and the _John Hancock_, were built in 1836 and are
now housed in the B & O Museum at Baltimore.

The history of these three locomotives is somewhat complicated. All were
in use at the Mount Clare station in Baltimore as recently as 1892, then
serving as switching engines. At that time, with a fourth, the _Martin
Van Buren_ of 1836, they were retired from active service so they could
be modified for the exhibit the B & O was planning for the following
year at the World’s Columbian Exposition.

As it was the desire of the B & O to show in this exhibit some earlier
“grasshoppers,” the _Andrew Jackson_ (figure 38) was altered to resemble
the first “grasshopper” built, Davis’ _Atlantic_ of 1832 (figure 39);
while the _John Quincy Adams_ was rebuilt to resemble the _Traveller_
(originally named the _Indian Chief_) of 1833.

The _John Hancock_, unaltered, was merely renamed the _Thomas Jefferson_
(figure 40), a “grasshopper” of 1835. Why the _John Quincy Adams_,
itself built in 1835, was not used for this purpose under its original
name, is not now understood. (The _Martin Van Buren_, now no longer in
existence, was altered considerably at that time to resemble the
_Mazeppa_, a so-called “crab” engine of 1838.)

    [Illustration: Figure 38.—_Andrew Jackson_, bearing number “7,” in a
    photo taken between 1850 and January 1, 1884, at which time it was
    renumbered “2.” Note tender.]

    [Illustration: Figure 39.—_Andrew Jackson_, as remodeled to resemble
    _Atlantic_, with Charles B. Chaney at throttle—a photo taken at B &
    O Mount Clare shops, July 7, 1912. Note wooden barrel used as water
    tank.]

The original _Andrew Jackson_, ever since called the _Atlantic_ (figure
41), has appeared at many railroad pageants throughout the East (figure
42); in 1935 and 1936 it was on exhibit in the National Museum (figure
43). The _John Hancock_, on the other hand, was recently given back its
original name (figure 44) after having carried the incorrect appellation
_Thomas Jefferson_ for about 60 years. Many railroad historians of
recent times have apparently not been aware of the name-switching
involving these two locomotives, which are now part of the permanent
collection in the B & O Museum.

    [Illustration: Figure 40.—_John Hancock_, bearing name _Thomas
    Jefferson_, at the Fair of the Iron Horse, September 30, 1927. When
    first placed in service, “grasshoppers” did not use metal water
    tanks.]

    [Illustration: Figure 41.—Recent photo of so-called _Atlantic_. Note
    absence of side rod that originally connected the two axles.]

    [Illustration: Figure 42.—So-called _Atlantic_ in 1935, with modern
    reproductions of the famous Imlay passenger coaches used on B & O in
    the 1830’s.]

    [Illustration: Figure 43.—So-called _Atlantic_ on exhibition in
    National Museum hall of transportation, in 1935.]

    [Illustration: Figure 44.—_John Hancock_ photographed during a
    recent appearance.]

    [Illustration: Figure 45.—_John Quincy Adams_ as restored for
    exhibition at Dayton, Ohio. This is the oldest complete
    American-built locomotive in existence. Metal water tank is not
    original.]

The _John Quincy Adams_ (figure 45), recently restored and repainted and
no longer referred to as the _Traveller_, is the oldest complete
American-built locomotive in existence.

These “grasshoppers” burned anthracite, as did the _York_. The cylinders
of the newer two of the survivors have a 22-inch stroke and a 12½-inch
bore (according to the 10th annual report of the B & O, for 1836, p. 22)
and originally operated on a steam pressure of 50 pounds per square
inch. With their thoroughly overhauled boilers, they now operate on 75.
The bore of the _John Quincy Adams_ is slightly smaller, 12¼ inches
(according to the 9th annual report of the B & O, for 1835, p. 24),
unless it has been increased by wear or replacement.

The wheelbase of each “grasshopper” is 49 inches, and the weight was
originally about 8½ tons. The wheels, modern replacements, are about 34
inches in diameter but the original ones were several inches larger. All
four wheels of each are (or were) connected by gearing and rods to the
two cylinders. In converting the _Andrew Jackson_ to represent the
_Atlantic_, however, the side rods were removed so that only its rear
wheels now serve as drivers, as did those of the original _Atlantic_.

It is of interest that at least one other “grasshopper” locomotive was
built by Gillingham and Winans, but not for the B & O. Named the
_Columbus_, this generally little known example was made in 1836 for the
Leipzig to Dresden Railroad in Germany, and quite probably was the first
American locomotive ever built for export. A description and
illustration of it are found in the German publication “Hundert Jahre
deutsche Eisenbahnen,” published in 1935.


                       Two Midwestern Locomotives

Among the early locomotives that have survived is the _Pioneer_ (figure
46), the first to have steamed out of Chicago, this having occurred on
October 25, 1848, at the opening of the Galena and Chicago Union Rail
Road. Built early in 1836, the _Pioneer_ was the 37th constructed by
Matthias W. Baldwin and is the oldest Baldwin locomotive now in
existence.

It was originally sold to the Utica and Schenectady Rail Road, in New
York’s Mohawk Valley, and was their locomotive _No. 7_. Later it was
sold to the Michigan Central Railroad, by whom it was reportedly renamed
the _Alert_, a name that is open to question. From the latter road the
Galena and Chicago Union obtained it in 1848.

In order to get the locomotive to Chicago, it had to be shipped by boat
across Lake Michigan from Michigan City, Ind., and hauled by teams to
the tracks. The little Baldwin locomotive at this time was given the
name _Pioneer_. Its new owner, the Galena and Chicago Union, later, in
1864, was merged into the then 5-year-old Chicago and North Western
Railway Co.

    [Illustration: Figure 46.—Chicago and North Western’s _Pioneer_,
    built in 1836 and oldest Baldwin locomotive in existence, as
    repainted for Chicago Railroad Fair of 1948.]

    [Illustration: Figure 47.—Earliest known photo of _Pioneer_, showing
    it at work in bridge construction at Rockford, Ill., in 1869.]

The _Pioneer_ had a full and active life, for it was in operation 12
years prior to its acquisition by the Galena road and 26 years after
(figure 47). It was at one time temporarily lent to the new Chicago,
Burlington and Quincy line, until that company was able to buy an engine
of its own, and was finally retired by the Chicago and North Western in
1874.

The _Pioneer_ is a typical Baldwin design of the period. A wood burner,
it weighs 10 tons, has slightly inclined cylinders 11 by 18 inches in
size, one pair of 54-inch driving wheels at the rear, and a 4-wheeled
swiveling truck at the front. The cylinder bore was originally 10
inches, but in 1872 the Chicago and North Western changed it to the
present slightly larger dimension.

While owned by the Michigan Central, it had been altered in several
ways, the principal change being in the valve motion. The locomotive
originally had a single fixed eccentric for each cylinder, with two arms
extending backward. These arms were fitted with drop hooks to engage
with a pin on a rocker arm that actuated the valve rod. The new motion,
installed by the Michigan Central, uses double eccentrics with V-hooks
for each cylinder. The cab and the cowcatcher, not applied to the
locomotive when it was constructed in 1836, are of a slightly later
period according to an article in “Baldwin Locomotives” (vol. 10, No. 2,
October 1931, pp. 3, 4).

In common with many of the other surviving old locomotives, the
_Pioneer_ has been on exhibition at many places, including the
Exposition of Railway Appliances at Chicago in 1883, the World’s
Columbian Exposition held there 10 years later, the Louisiana Purchase
Exposition at St. Louis in 1904, the Chicago World’s Fair 30 years
later, and the Chicago Railroad Fair in 1948 and 1949. At the latter
fair it operated under its own power every day each summer, requiring
only the replacement of the old boiler flues with new ones of sturdier
construction to make it again serviceable. In recent years it has been
exhibited at the Museum of Science and Industry at Chicago, but is now
stored in that city in one of the shops of the Chicago and North
Western.

Not a great deal is known of the early history of the _Mississippi_
(figure 48), which is now exhibited at the Museum of Science and
Industry at Chicago. Originally it was used on a pioneering railroad
operating east out of Natchez in the late 1830’s. Some writers have
contended that it was imported from England. Others, including Angus
Sinclair, the railroad historian, have stated that it was probably built
by the New York firm of H. R. Dunham and Co.

    [Illustration: Figure 48.—_Mississippi_, probably built in the
    1830’s, with tender of a later period. Photo may have been taken
    after locomotive was rebuilt for exhibition at World’s Columbian
    Exposition at Chicago, in 1893.]

The _Mississippi_, however, has none of the characteristics of English
locomotives of its period, and it is well known that a representative of
Dunham took several locomotives from New York to Natchez in late 1836.
It is most probable that the _Mississippi_ is a Dunham-built locomotive
of the middle 1830’s.

Its first recorded service began in April 1837, between Natchez and
Hamburg, Miss., a distance of about 19 miles. A violent storm lashed
Natchez on May 7, 1840, and destroyed considerable railroad property.
From this and subsequent financial blows the little railroad shortly
succumbed, and the _Mississippi_ passed to other owners. Among these
were the Grand Gulf and Port Gibson Railroad, the Mississippi Valley and
Ship Island Railroad, and the Meridian, Brookhaven and Natchez Railroad.
The latter road was acquired in 1891 by the Illinois Central Railroad
Co.

In the spring of 1893 the locomotive was rebuilt at the McComb, Miss.,
shops of the Illinois Central and then was taken under its own power
from McComb to Chicago, a distance of 815 miles. There it was exhibited
at the World’s Columbian Exposition. It has since been seen in many
places, including the old Field Museum at Chicago, the Louisiana
Purchase Exposition in 1904, the Semicentennial of Wheeling, W. Va.,
held in June 1913, and the Chicago World’s Fair in 1933 and 1934. The
tender usually seen with the locomotive and marked “Natchez & Hamburg R.
R.” is not the original one, but is of a considerably later period.

The _Mississippi_ is a wood burner, weighs 7 tons, has wheels 43 inches
in diameter, and, according to Sinclair, has cylinders with a bore and
stroke of 9½ and 16 inches. Its tractive force is said to be 4,821
pounds.


                           A One-Armed Billy

    [Illustration: Figure 49.—Full sized operable replica of
    _Lafayette_, built in 1927 by Baltimore and Ohio Railroad Co.]

An operable replica (figure 49) of another locomotive of the same period
also exists. The _Lafayette_, built in 1837 by William Norris of
Philadelphia, was the first Baltimore and Ohio locomotive to have either
a horizontal boiler or six wheels. As B & O _No. 13_, with a 4-2-0 wheel
arrangement, it represented the first stage of the transition from the
old 4-wheeled vertical-boiler types. It was the first of a group of
eight ordered from Norris and was placed on the road in April 1837.

According to the railroad historian J. Snowden Bell, these locomotives
were known as “one-armed Billys,” a term derived from the name of the
builder and the single connecting rod on each side. Some of them were in
service with light local passenger trains as late as 1857, but by 1839
it had been realized that they could not meet the rapidly increasing
requirements of the expanding B & O railroad system. As a result, only
the eight “one-armed Billys” were bought by the company, and as early as
September 1839 the road introduced on its lines the more advanced 4-4-0,
or American-type locomotive—the second stage of transition from the old
“grasshoppers” and “crabs.”

The replica of the _Lafayette_ has one pair of 42-inch driving wheels,
and a leading truck with four 29-inch wheels, although the diameters of
the wheels of the original were 48 inches and 30 inches, respectively.
It looks somewhat like the Chicago and North Western’s Baldwin-built
_Pioneer_, but whereas it was Baldwin’s practice to locate the driving
axle behind the firebox, the Norris engine had it located ahead. This
feature gave the Norris 4-2-0’s greater adhesion and tractive force. The
_Lafayette_ replica, with a wheelbase of 112¾ inches and a weight of
29,200 pounds, has a tractive force of 2,323 pounds. Its cylinders have
a 9-inch bore and an 18-inch stroke, and it operates on a steam pressure
of 90 pounds per square inch.

The replica was built in 1927 for the Fair of the Iron Horse and later
appeared at the Chicago World’s Fair in 1933 and 1934, the New York
World’s Fair in 1939 and 1940, and the Chicago Railroad Fair in 1948 and
1949. It has also been taken several times to the west coast, where it
has been used in the filming of motion pictures. In the fall of 1955 it
was used in northern Georgia in a film based on the story of the famous
Civil War locomotive _General_ (see p. 84).

For many years the replica carried the nameplate _William Galloway_,
this name having been given it shortly after it was built, to honor a
famous early locomotive engineer of the Baltimore and Ohio. Today,
bearing the correct nameplate, the _Lafayette_ is usually to be seen at
the B & O Museum in Baltimore.


                          A Rocket in America

    [Illustration: Figure 50.—_Rocket_, built in 1838 by Braithwaite of
    London, England, and used by the Philadelphia and Reading Railroad
    until 1879. Photo was made about 1900.]

The second oldest of the three complete British locomotives of the
1825-1849 period extant in North America is the _Rocket_ (figure 50),
built in early 1838 for the Philadelphia and Reading Rail Road Co. by
Braithwaite[4] of London. It was the first of eight Braithwaite
locomotives purchased by that railroad between 1838 and 1841.

The _Rocket_ was the third of the Reading’s locomotives, having been
preceded by the Baldwin-built _Neversink_ in August 1836 and the
Winans-built _Delaware_ in January 1838. It was delivered at
Philadelphia by boat in March 1838, and was then carried up the
Schuylkill Canal to the foot of Penn Street in Reading. From there it
was hauled by team to the terminus of the Reading-to-Pottstown line at
Seventh and Penn Streets, where it participated in the opening of this
portion of the road in May 1838. It was first used in passenger service
in July 1838, but in 1845, as the need grew for heavier motive power, it
was relegated to the Construction and Roadway Department, where it
remained in service until 1865. Next used for a short time to move and
assort cars at Reading, it was finally transferred to the wharves at
Port Richmond, Philadelphia, where it worked until retirement in March
1879, covering during its career some 310,164 miles.

    [Illustration: Figure 51.—Photo, taken about 1887, of _Rocket_ as it
    appeared during final stages of its life as _P & R locomotive No.
    1_. Note absence of builder’s plate.]

The _Rocket_ was constructed as a wood burner, but in 1862 was modified
to burn anthracite coal. At that time it was also converted into a tank
locomotive, a cab was added, and, it is now thought, the original wheels
were replaced by the standard Philadelphia and Reading wheels shown in
figure 51. Its present wheels, undoubtedly installed when the locomotive
was refurbished in 1893, are 49½ inches in diameter and contain 20 round
metal spokes staggered around the hub. Published descriptions of the
_Rocket_ refer to 41¾-inch wheels, but this figure probably applies to
an earlier set, possibly that installed in 1862. The _Rocket_ was
formerly driven by all four wheels, but today only the rear two wheels
are drivers.

The cylinders of the locomotive, which are inside, have a 10½-inch bore
and a 16-inch stroke. The wheelbase is 58 inches and the weight was
originally 8.4 tons. This was raised during the 1862 rebuilding to 11.8
tons. The gauge is standard—56½ inches. The present smokestack is not
original, and a headlight was not installed until recent years. The tank
and cab added in 1862, as well as the bell, were removed at the time of
the refurbishment.

After its retirement in 1879, the _Rocket_ stood neglected at Reading
until it was placed in condition for exhibition and permanent
preservation at the time of the World’s Columbian Exposition in 1893. It
was exhibited in 1904 at St. Louis, and then was housed for many years
in the Reading’s Columbia Avenue station in Philadelphia. It appeared at
the Fair of the Iron Horse in 1927 (figure 52), after which it was taken
to the Reading Terminal in Philadelphia. In October 1933 the _Rocket_
was lent to The Franklin Institute in Philadelphia, where it has since
remained on exhibition.

    [Illustration: Figure 52.—_Rocket_ at the Fair of the Iron Horse,
    October 7, 1927. Note shortened smokestack.]


                            A Canadian Relic

    [Illustration: Figure 53.—Photo of _Samson_, built in England in
    1838 by Hackworth, taken in Nova Scotia by a New Glasgow
    photographer some time before 1890. Observe chairs provided for
    engineer.]

The third and last of the three complete British locomotives of the
1825-1849 period remaining in North America is also the only extant
locomotive of the period on this continent located outside the United
States.[5]

The _Samson_ (figure 53) was built by Timothy Hackworth at New Shildon,
Durham, England, in the summer of 1838, at a cost of about $10,000, for
the General Mining Association of Nova Scotia. (Despite statements that
the _Albion_, also preserved in Nova Scotia, was built by Hackworth
before 1840, it was actually built by Rayne and Burn in Newcastle in
1854.)

The _Samson_ was not, as has so often been claimed, the first locomotive
in Canada. It had been preceded in 1836 by the Stephenson-built
_Dorchester_ employed on the Champlain and St. Lawrence Railroad,
running between St. Johns and Laprairie, south of Montreal. The
_Dorchester_ exploded and was demolished near Joliette in 1864. Also
antedating the _Samson_ was the _Jason C. Pierce_, built in 1837 by
William Norris for the same railroad, and destroyed in a fire in about
1890.

The _Samson_ was one of three identical Hackworth locomotives built for
the General Mining Association, whose railroad was known unofficially as
the Albion Mines Railway, and the South Pictou Railroad. Each had an
0-6-0 wheel arrangement, 56½-inch gauge, 48-inch cast iron plate wheels,
and vertical cylinders with a bore and stroke of 15¼ and 18 inches. Each
weighed 17 tons. The other two, the _John Buddle_ and the _Hercules_,
were scrapped in 1885 and 1892, respectively.

    [Illustration: Figure 54.—_Samson_ at Chicago in 1883, during
    Exposition of Railway Appliances. George Davidson, long its
    engineer, stands at controls on right.]

The _Samson_ made a trial run in December 1838, and was put into regular
service on September 19, 1839, hauling cars of coal from the Albion
mines at Stellarton to the harbor at Pictou, a distance of about 6
miles. According to one early report, a train of 30 coal cars, weighing
3 tons each, was the usual load pulled to the harbor. The _Samson_ made
about 3 round trips a day at a speed of a little less than 10 miles an
hour. This same report states that up to 1856 the locomotive operated on
a steam pressure of 70 pounds per square inch, and thereafter, until it
was taken out of service in the early 1880’s, on 45 pounds.

The locomotive was operated in an unusual manner. The engineer was
stationed at one end, adjacent to the cylinders and driving gear, while
the fireman was located at the other end, from which the boiler was
fired.

The boiler is about 13 feet long and 4 feet in diameter, and has a large
U-shaped return flue. The cylinders are mounted vertically at the rear,
and the piston rods are guided by Watt’s parallel motion instead of the
usual cross heads and slide bars. The engine has no frame, the axle
bearings being bolted to brackets riveted to the under side of the
boiler. Only the front and middle axle bearings are fitted with springs.

In the course of its working career, the _Samson_ traveled considerably.
In addition to having been brought across the Atlantic, the old
locomotive was brought to Chicago in 1883 for display at the Exposition
of Railway Appliances (figure 54). There it was accompanied by George
Davidson, long its engineer and said to have come with it to Nova Scotia
from England.

    [Illustration: Figure 55.—_Samson_, with an original passenger car
    of 1840, at the Fair of the Iron Horse, September 30, 1927.]

Ten years later, in 1893, it was again brought to Chicago, this time to
be exhibited at the World’s Columbian Exposition. At the conclusion of
the exposition the _Samson_, and the _Albion_ that had accompanied it,
were taken by the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad Co. to Baltimore for
preservation there. The B & O later included the _Samson_ (and also the
_Albion_) in the exhibition of historic locomotives at the Fair of the
Iron Horse in 1927 (figure 55).

In June 1928, when the two old locomotives were given by the B & O to
the Province of Nova Scotia, the _Samson_ returned to the land of its
youth, only to be placed in storage in Halifax. Later, however, it was
given to the town of New Glasgow, through which it had run almost daily
in its early days, and it is now housed in a small building especially
constructed for it at the town’s railroad station.


                            The Final Decade

In 1839 the Philadelphia locomotive building firm of Eastwick and
Harrison constructed to the order of Moncure Robinson for the
Philadelphia and Reading Rail Road Co. a noteworthy anthracite-burning
locomotive, named the _Gowan and Marx_ after an English banking firm.
This engine during trials on February 20, 1840, turned in what was for
the time an outstanding performance. It hauled from Reading to the
inclined plane on the Columbia and Philadelphia Rail Road, located
several miles from Vine and Broad Streets in Philadelphia, 101 cars of
freight, a load of 423 long tons (2,240 pounds). The total weight of
this load was 947,520 pounds not including the weight of the engine
itself and its tender. The engine, in running order, weighed 24,660
pounds. The story of this remarkable feat is told by Joseph Harrison,
Jr., in his book, “The Locomotive Engine, and Philadelphia’s Share in
Its Early Improvements.”

So pleased was the Philadelphia and Reading with this locomotive that
the road decided to order more of the same general style. However, as
Eastwick and Harrison shortly became involved with plans to construct
locomotives in Russia, and contemplated closing their Philadelphia
works, most of these additional locomotives were made by other builders.
A dozen or so, somewhat similar to the _Gowan and Marx_, were built in
the machine shop of a Lowell, Mass., firm named “Proprietors of Locks
and Canals on Merrimack River.” Others were built by the New Castle
Manufacturing Co. at New Castle, Del.

At least two, however, the _Boston_ and the _J. E. Thayer_, were built
by Eastwick and Harrison, and placed in service on the Philadelphia and
Reading in September and October, respectively, of 1842.

What is thought to be one of these now famous locomotives has survived
(figure 56). It is the earliest extant 4-4-0, or American type. Known
today as the _Peoples’ Railway No. 3_, it was obtained at fourth or
fifth hand in about 1872 by the Peoples’ Railway, which was then
establishing a line from the York Street station at Pottsville to
Minersville, Pa., a distance of about 4½ miles. Seldom used by the
Peoples’ Railway after 1883, it was obtained by the Reading Co. in the
early 1920’s when that road took over some of the rolling stock of the
Peoples’ Railway. Since October 1933 it has been on loan to The Franklin
Institute in Philadelphia, where it is exhibited with the
Braithwaite-built _Rocket_ of 1838, also owned by the Reading Co.

The _No. 3_ has been the subject of much speculation and investigation
since it was obtained by the Reading. Its origin and the name of its
builder are not definitely known, nor is it absolutely certain for whom
it was constructed. Without question, however, it is of the period of
the early 1840’s, and is similar in appearance to the famous _Gowan and
Marx_, although of considerably longer wheelbase.

Paul T. Warner, for many years writer and historian for the Baldwin
Locomotive Works, conducted an intensive examination of the _No. 3_, and
in January 1934 prepared a thorough paper on his findings, based on a
careful comparison of the _No. 3_ with contemporary drawings of the
various other locomotives, and on a comparison of its dimensions with
those still known of the others.

He concluded that from the information at hand it was not possible to
state positively which, if any, of these locomotives it was, or even if
it had been built for the Philadelphia and Reading. Similar engines, he
pointed out, had also been built by Eastwick and Harrison for other
railroads in eastern Pennsylvania, among them the Beaver Meadow Rail
Road and Coal Co. and the Hazelton (sic) and Lehigh Rail Road. The _No.
3_ could easily have been built for one of these roads before falling
into the possession of the Peoples’ Railway, particularly since it is
known to have had a number of prior owners.

It was Warner’s opinion, however, that if it had originally been a
Philadelphia and Reading engine, it was more likely to have been either
the _Boston_ or the _J. E. Thayer_ of Eastwick and Harrison rather than
a locomotive built by another firm, of which the Lowell-built
_Conestoga_ of 1842 had been considered by some to be the chief
possibility.

At first glance the _No. 3_ appears much more modern than its actual
age, but this is mainly because it has the 4-4-0 wheel arrangement with
which people today are more familiar. The cab, not original, is of a
design similar to that used on the _Pawnee_ class of engines first built
at the Reading shops in 1852. Also not original are the headlight, the
sandboxes, and the truck wheels. Sandboxes worked from the cab were not
used in this country prior to 1846; the truck wheels, 30 inches in
diameter, are of cast iron, manufactured by A. Whitney & Sons of
Philadelphia, whose wheel foundry was established in 1846. The
smokestack has obviously been altered, if not replaced entirely.

The _No. 3_, now an anthracite-burning locomotive, is thought to have
been originally a wood burner. The firebox is of the Bury type, which
was in common use up to 1850.

The four driving wheels of the _No. 3_ are 42½ inches in diameter, the
extreme wheelbase is 178 inches, and the distance between the two
driving axles is 55½ inches. The inclined cylinders are connected by
long rods to the rear drivers. The exact cylinder bore, which had not
been known for many years, was measured in October 1954 by
representatives of the Reading Co. and found to be 12¾ inches. The
stroke is 18 inches.

The type of reversing mechanism designed by Andrew M. Eastwick in 1835
is thought to have been originally applied, and it is also thought that
the original steam chests are still on the locomotive. The old valve
gear has been replaced by a double-eccentric motion, the two eccentric
rods being respectively attached to the top and bottom of a straight
link. When the new motion was applied, the old reversing blocks were
removed from the steam chests and discarded, the new valves being placed
directly on the valve seats. This made it necessary to use only the
lower stuffing boxes for the valve rods, and so the upper openings were
permanently closed by suitable fittings. There are but two positions for
the reverse lever, as was the case with the original valve gear, and the
valves are always worked full stroke.

The absence of definitive facts concerning the early history of the _No.
3_ is challenging, and it would add much to railroad history if in the
near future the complete story could be developed as a result of further
study of the locomotive itself, and of the written records.

Of the many hundreds of locomotives built by Holmes Hinkley, the only
one extant is the interesting old _Lion_ (figure 57), built in 1846 in
Boston at the Hinkley and Drury plant. It is not Hinkley’s first
locomotive, as has often been said, nor is it his first _Lion_, as his
22d locomotive, built in 1844 for the Nashua and Lowell Railroad, also
bore that name.

    [Illustration: Figure 56.—Controversial _Peoples’ Railway No. 3_,
    built in the 1840’s, as it appeared in 1923.]

The second _Lion_, now preserved in the Crosby Mechanical Laboratory at
the University of Maine at Orono, Maine, was built for the Machiasport
Railroad (later called the Whitneyville and Machiasport Railroad)
running between the towns of Whitneyville and Machiasport in Maine.
Strictly a lumber road about 7½ miles long, it was abandoned in the
early 1890’s when lumber became scarce in that region. The _Lion_ and a
similar but slightly older Hinkley locomotive, the _Tiger_, fell into
disuse, and were subsequently sold as junk to Thomas Towle of Portland.
What happened to the _Tiger_ is today not known, but quite probably it
was broken up for scrap.

Alderman E. E. Rounds of Portland succeeded in raising funds to acquire
the _Lion_ for exhibition in the Fourth of July parade held in Portland
in 1898. It then remained in Portland on city property until 1905 when,
through the efforts of Alderman Rounds, the President and alumni of the
University of Maine, and friends of the University, it was shipped to
the University to be preserved as a museum piece. Once on the campus it
was stored in various places and received little attention, until it was
moved in 1929 to the then newly completed Crosby Mechanical Laboratory.

    [Illustration: Figure 57.—_Lion_, built in 1846 by Holmes Hinkley of
    Boston, as it appeared in what is probably the Portland, Maine,
    junkyard from which it was rescued in 1898.]

As the result of a study made in the fall of 1929, some missing parts of
the _Lion_ were replaced, and it was restored to the point where it can
now be operated on compressed air. Today the locomotive, jacked up so
that its four wheels can be made to operate, is a valued relic at the
University of Maine (figure 58).

    [Illustration: Figure 58.—_Lion_ as now exhibited at University of
    Maine.]

It has been stated that the _Lion_ cost $2,700, exclusive of the tender.
The bore and stroke of its cylinders are 9¼ inches and 17 inches,
respectively, and the diameter of the four wheels is approximately 42½
inches. The gauge is standard, 56½ inches. The locomotive alone weighs 9
tons.

The final survivor of this group of early locomotives is the _Memnon_
(figure 59), built for the Baltimore and Ohio in 1848 by the New Castle
Manufacturing Co., New Castle, Del., under subcontract to Matthias W.
Baldwin. It is one of a small group of similar freight engines built by
Baldwin, who won the contract as a result of his bid in reply to a B & O
advertisement in the “American Railroad Journal” of October 1847.

The design of the _Memnon_ class of locomotives followed closely that of
the _Dragon_, a slightly smaller locomotive built by Baldwin in late
1847 and placed on the road in January 1848. All had an 0-8-0 wheel
arrangement, and were intended for heavy-duty work with freight trains.
The general design of these locomotives had been originated by Baldwin
in 1846 in an order of freight engines built by him for the Philadelphia
and Reading.

The _Memnon_ type of engine had four coupled driving wheels on each
side, and early reports give their diameter as 43 inches. Today’s
measurement of the _Memnon_ reveals the diameter of its wheels,
undoubtedly replacements, to be only 41 inches. The wheels on the two
center axles are unflanged, the better to negotiate curves of limited
radius with its wheelbase of 135 inches (in 1847 the shortest curve on
the B & O had a 400-foot radius).

The inclined cylinders have a 17-inch bore and a 22-inch stroke, and the
valve gear is of the Gooch stationary link type. The _Memnon_ is now
operated on a steam pressure of 65 pounds per square inch, although it
originally operated on 100.

    [Illustration: Figure 59.—Recent photo of _Memnon_, built in 1848 by
    New Castle Manufacturing Co.]

    [Illustration: Figure 60.—_Memnon_ as it appeared shortly after
    January 1, 1884, when it had been renumbered “13.” A few years later
    it was given back its original number, “57.”]

The original specifications, as set forth in the B & O advertisement,
called for a locomotive weight not to exceed 20 tons (of 2,240 pounds).
According to J. Snowden Bell, the weight amounted to about 52,000 pounds
at first, but changes reduced it to about 47,000 pounds. It would be
interesting to know what parts, unnecessary enough to justify their
removal or so sturdy that they could be drastically lightened, were
involved in changes that reduced the total weight by 5,000 pounds.
Today, the unloaded weight of the engine and tender together is 74,700
pounds. The tractive force is 8,580 pounds. As was true of the
Baldwin-built _Pioneer_, the cowcatcher of the _Memnon_ was not
installed originally.

This class of locomotive, which burned bituminous coal, introduced to
the B & O the grate having a rocking bar in the center, with fingers on
each side that interlocked with projections on fixed bars in front and
behind. The rocking bar operated from the footboard.

The _Memnon_ has appeared with other engines in the historic collection
of the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad at many expositions, fairs, and
railroad pageants. Its permanent home is now that railroad’s
transportation museum at Baltimore. Originally numbered _57_, the
_Memnon_ was renumbered _13_ on January 1, 1884 (figure 60), and when on
exhibition at St. Louis in 1904 it was incorrectly labeled _Dragon_.

Today, however, bearing its correct name and number, it stands on the
roster as the oldest of all extant B & O freight locomotives, as well as
the last of the locomotives to have survived the first quarter-century
of railroading in North America.

    [Illustration: Uncaptioned locomotive.]




                               SUPPLEMENT
Models, in the National Museum, of Locomotives Not Included in This Work


Certain of the locomotives, locomotive parts, and models described in
the foregoing pages have been noted as being in the collection of the
United States National Museum. In addition to these, the collection of
the Museum includes 21 models of locomotives that do not fall into the
scope of this work, as the originals they represent are either no longer
in existence, are of too recent vintage, or were not used in North
America. Among them are five operable models—four steam and one
electric.

The originals represented by many of these models were involved in
notable events in the history of railroading or mark major steps in its
progress. For these reasons, and in order to provide the reader with a
complete catalog of the locomotive collection of the United States
National Museum, a brief description of each will be given on the pages
that follow.


                      Trevithick Locomotive, 1804

The National Museum’s nonoperable model shown in figure 61 represents
the probable form of the first rail locomotive of Richard Trevithick,
the Cornish engineer who was one of the early advocates of the
high-pressure steam engine. The Museum’s model (USNM 180058) is about 20
inches in length, and its flywheel is about 10 inches in diameter. It
was obtained in 1888 from its builder D. Ballauf, a model maker often
employed by the Museum.

    [Illustration: Figure 61.—Model of Trevithick locomotive, 1804.]

Trevithick, who a few years earlier had constructed several successful
steam vehicles for use on the highways, in February 1804 completed the
construction of a machine at Pen-y-darran, near Merthyr Tydfil,
Glamorganshire, Wales, for use at the Pen-y-darran Iron Works of Samuel
Homfray. It is thought to have been the first steam locomotive ever
propelled along a railway.

The first trip was made on Monday, February 13, 1804. Among the several
trips made by the locomotive was one of 9 miles, between Merthyr Tydfil
and Abercynon, drawing 5 cars with a load of 10 tons of iron and 70 men.
Although a satisfactory machine, and one that proved that a useful load
could be hauled through the adhesion of wheels on smooth track, it was
not long in use because of frequent breakage of the primitive railway.

The single horizontal steam cylinder, projecting partly into the end of
the boiler, operated a crankshaft fitted with a large-diameter flywheel.
The driving wheels were coupled to the crankshaft by gearing. The bore
and stroke of the cylinder are said to have been about 8¼ and 54 inches,
respectively, and the unflanged wheels were about 45 inches in diameter.
Discharge of the exhaust steam into the chimney was utilized with this
particular locomotive, as Trevithick appreciated fully the effect it had
upon the fire. The date of this early use of exhaust steam to aid the
fire greatly antedates those claimed for later locomotive builders.


              Trevithick Locomotive Catch-me-who-can, 1808

Trevithick’s next best known locomotive, his _Catch-me-who-can_, is
represented in the national collection by a 9-inch-long nonoperable
model (USNM 244889). The model (figure 62) was transferred to the Museum
from the U. S. Department of the Interior in 1906. Nothing further is
known of its origin.

The original _Catch-me-who-can_, built for Trevithick by Hazeldine and
Rastrick of Bridgnorth, was exhibited in the summer of 1808 in London on
a small circular railway laid down on part of the ground now occupied by
Euston Square. The public was charged admission to enter a small
enclosure to view the demonstration or ride in a small car pulled by the
locomotive.

As on his 1804 locomotive, a single cylinder projecting partly within
the end of the boiler was used, but it was vertical instead of
horizontal. The rear wheels only were driven, actuated by long, return
connecting rods attached to the ends of a wide crosshead. Because of the
necessary arrangement of the cranks on the ends of the rear axle, it was
entirely possible for the engine to stop on dead center. This was
likewise a fault of the 1804 locomotive, which had a single crank.

The engine is said to have weighed 8 tons and to have traveled at a
speed of 12 miles an hour, but troubles with the track ultimately
brought the demonstrations to a halt. No dimensions are known today of
the original _Catch-me-who-can_, which has long since disappeared.

    [Illustration: Figure 62.—Model of Trevithick _Catch-me-who-can_,
    1808.]


                   Stephenson Locomotive Rocket, 1829

Probably the most famous of Robert Stephenson’s many locomotives, the
_Rocket_, winner of the Rainhill Trials in October 1829, is represented
in the Museum collection by a nonoperable model (figure 63) that, with
its tender, is a little less than 1½ feet long. The model was
transferred to the Museum (USNM 244890) from the U. S. Department of the
Interior in 1906.

The original _Rocket_, the considerably altered remains of which now
appear on exhibition in the Science Museum at South Kensington, was
constructed by Stephenson at Newcastle-upon-Tyne to compete for the £500
prize offered by the Liverpool and Manchester Railway. The _Rocket_
turned out to be the only one of the five competing machines to finish
the trials. Its success was especially important because it showed
beyond doubt that steam locomotives were suitable for general railway
work, and also because they could attain speeds not previously known.
Running with a light load, it reached a speed of 29 miles an hour.

    [Illustration: Figure 63.—Model of Stephenson _Rocket_, 1829.]

The locomotive weighed 3¼ tons empty and 4¼ tons in working order. It
had two inclined cylinders of 8-inch bore and 17-inch stroke and two
56½-inch-diameter driving wheels at the front. A tubular boiler
suggested by Henry Booth, the secretary and treasurer of the Liverpool
and Manchester Railway, is said to have contributed greatly to the
success of the _Rocket_ during the trials. It must not be forgotten,
however, that in America John Stevens had used successfully a tubular
boiler in his experimental locomotive in 1825.

The _Rocket_ was used on the Liverpool and Manchester Railway until
1836, and from then until 1844 on the Midgeholme Railway near Carlisle.
It was presented to the Science Museum in 1862, where it is now an
outstanding exhibit in the railroad collection.

J. G. H. Warren’s history of Robert Stephenson & Co., which contains
detailed and well illustrated accounts of the _Rocket_ and of the
Rainhill Trials, will interest those seeking further details on either
subject.


                 Baldwin Locomotive Old Ironsides, 1832

The locomotive _Old Ironsides_ is represented in the Museum’s collection
by a nonoperable model (figure 64) that, with its tender, is 3 feet
long. The model (USNM 180114) was given to the Museum in 1889 by
Burnham, Parry, Williams & Co., who were then proprietors of the Baldwin
Locomotive Works.

    [Illustration: Figure 64.—Model of Baldwin _Old Ironsides_, 1832.]

The original _Old Ironsides_ was the first full sized locomotive built
by Matthias W. Baldwin, a jeweler turned machinist, of Philadelphia. It
was constructed for the Philadelphia, Germantown, and Norristown
Rail-Road Co., which had been using horse cars in operating a short line
of only 6 miles between Philadelphia and Germantown.

The line’s first locomotive, _Old Ironsides_, was initially operated on
the road on November 23, 1832, and was a success from the start, though
a few understandable imperfections were noted during the trials and
shortly corrected. The fairly new locomotive _John Bull_ of the Camden
and Amboy Rail Road and Transportation Co. had been inspected by Baldwin
before he undertook the project. Undoubtedly it furnished helpful
suggestions to the man whose locomotive building enterprise was
ultimately to eclipse anything possibly dreamed of by him.

The locomotive, contracted for at $4,000 but for which Baldwin was,
after some difficulty, able to collect only $3,500, was somewhat similar
to the locomotives of the English _Planet_ class quite popular at the
time. The two driving wheels, located at the rear, were larger than the
carrying ones at the front, the diameters being 54 and 45 inches,
respectively. The two cylinders had a bore of 9½ inches and a stroke of
18. The exhaust steam was discharged into the chimney in order to
increase the draft. The boiler, 30 inches in diameter, contained 72
copper tubes 1½ inches in diameter and 7 feet long.

A complete description of _Old Ironsides_ and detailed accounts of its
first trials are to be found in “History of the Baldwin Locomotive
Works, 1831-1923.”


               Davis and Gartner Locomotive Arabian, 1834

Davis and Gartner, who built the _Atlantic_ in 1832 for the Baltimore
and Ohio Rail Road (see p. 47), built as their next two “grasshoppers”
the _Traveller_ and the _Arabian_. The latter of these was placed in
service on the B & O in July 1834. Neither of these two locomotives is
extant, but a 2-foot-long nonoperable model of the _Arabian_ (figure 65)
is now in the National Museum collection (USNM 233511). It was made in
the Museum in about 1900 by C. R. Luscombe.

The _Arabian_ was similar in design to the three “grasshoppers” that
have survived, but differed from them in many small ways. Its two
cylinders, for example, had a bore and stroke of 12 and 22 inches. This
bore was fractionally less than that of the other three. Also, its
weight with fuel and water, 7½ tons, was about a ton less than that of
any of the others.

The extent to which the Museum’s model represents these slight
differences between the _Arabian_ and the “grasshoppers” that followed
it cannot now be determined. Most of these differences would be
impossible to reproduce on such a small scale. It is entirely possible
that the model represented no particular “grasshopper,” and the name
_Arabian_ may have been selected by chance.

A detailed description of the construction of the _Arabian_ and a
discussion of its performance characteristics appear in the eighth
(1834) and ninth (1835) annual reports of the Baltimore and Ohio Rail
Road Co.

    [Illustration: Figure 65.—Model of Davis and Gartner _Arabian_,
    1834.]


         Rogers, Ketchum & Grosvenor Locomotive Sandusky, 1837

The _Sandusky_, first locomotive built by the firm of Rogers, Ketchum &
Grosvenor of Paterson, N. J., is represented in the Museum’s collection
by a 2-foot-long nonoperable model (figure 66) of the locomotive and its
tender. The model (USNM 180245) was built for the Museum in 1888 by D.
Ballauf.

Notice of the firm’s intention to produce locomotives was given in the
“American Railroad Journal” for December 24, 1836, and the original
_Sandusky_ was constructed during the following year. Intended for the
New Jersey Railroad and Transportation Co., it was built to the gauge of
that road—58 inches. However, after a trial trip on October 6 between
Paterson and New Brunswick, it was purchased for the Mad River and Lake
Erie Railroad by that road’s president, J. H. James of Urbana, Ohio.

    [Illustration: Figure 66.—Model of Rogers, Ketchum & Grosvenor
    _Sandusky_, 1837.]

It was delivered to Sandusky, Ohio, on November 17, at which time not a
foot of track had been laid. The engine was used in the construction of
the road, which in consequence was built to the gauge of the engine.
This fact has been given as the reason why the legislature of Ohio at
one time passed an act requiring all railroads built in Ohio to be of
58-inch gauge. On April 11, 1838, regular trips for the conveyance of
passengers commenced between Bellevue and Sandusky, a distance of 16
miles, and the locomotive _Sandusky_ was used.

The _Sandusky_ resembled the early Stephenson engines in some respects,
but differed principally in having a 4-wheeled leading truck, the wheels
of which were 30 inches in diameter. The two driving wheels, made of
cast iron and with hollow spokes and rims, were 54 inches in diameter.
The crankshaft throws were counterbalanced by a method of balancing
devised by Thomas Rogers, who had filed a patent application on it dated
July 12, 1837. This consisted of having the part of the wheel rim
opposite the crank throw cast solid, while the rest of the rim was
hollow.

The driving wheels and the inclined 11- by 16-inch cylinders were inside
the frame, whereas the eccentric rods, working off the outer ends of the
driving axle, were outside. The bonnet-type smokestack had a deflecting
cone in its center and a wire mesh on the top to prevent the escape of
sparks.


          Rogers, Ketchum & Grosvenor Locomotive General, 1855

The smallest locomotive model in the National Museum (figure 67) is of
the wood-burning locomotive _General_ that figured so prominently in the
famous Civil War locomotive chase of April 12, 1862. (In William
Pittenger’s “The Great Locomotive Chase” is told the complete story of
this epic adventure, which took place when a group of Northern raiders
stole the _General_ and its train at Big Shanty, Ga. The Confederates
finally recaptured the _General_ minus the cars, which had been cut
loose to delay the pursuers, but with most of the raiders, after a
thrilling pursuit that led them 90 miles away, to Ringgold, Ga., just
south of Chattanooga, Tenn.)

The Museum’s display is constructed from a pair of model kits, to which
a great many engineering details have been added. It shows two
beautifully made reproductions, scaled ⅛ inch to the foot, passing in
opposite directions on a slight curve. Each is 7 inches long. The
builder, Adolph H. Schutz of Washington, D. C., in 1955 presented the
model to the Museum (USNM 313724), where it had been on exhibit as a
loan since 1951.

Built by the Rogers, Ketchum & Grosvenor plant at Paterson, N. J., in
1855, the original _General_ was used on the Western and Atlantic
Railroad for many years. It is now on permanent exhibit at Chattanooga
in the Union Station of the Nashville, Chattanooga & St. Louis Railway.
A 4-4-0, or American type, it is the earliest of this particular type
represented in the Museum’s collection of models.

    [Illustration: Figure 67.—Model of Rogers, Ketchum & Grosvenor
    _General_, 1855.]


                 American-Type Locomotive of about 1890

An operable model (figure 68) in the Museum’s collection (USNM 309515),
appears to represent a New York Central and Hudson River Railroad 4-4-0
locomotive of the period of about 1890. This class of locomotive was
built by the Schenectady Locomotive Works to the New York Central’s
design, and had 78-inch driving wheels, cylinders with a bore of 19
inches and a stroke of 24 inches, and weighed 120,000 pounds.

    [Illustration: Figure 68.—Operable model of an American-type
    locomotive of about 1890.]

Work on this model was commenced by the donor, the late Robert E. M.
Bain, in 1916, and it was completed about three years later, only spare
time having been employed in its construction. The model was given to
the Museum in 1928. The length of the locomotive and tender is 80
inches, the gauge is 6½ inches, the diameter of the driving wheels is
8⁹/₁₆ inches, and the bore and stroke of the cylinders are 1½ and 3
inches, respectively.

The brakes on the model are inoperative, as the actuating cylinders for
the brake system are dummies. On the other hand, such parts as the
boiler, firebox, steam gauge, water gauge, throttle, and valve motion
are all operable, and the donor has asserted that there is even ring
packing in the cylinders. Although capable of being fired and steamed
up, using coal as the fuel, the locomotive has never been operated.

The number on the locomotive and tender apparently represent the year
the donor commenced his work on the model, as there was never a New York
Central locomotive of this type bearing that number.


                 New York Central Locomotive 999, 1893

The Museum’s nonoperable model (figure 69) of the famous _999_, long the
holder of the world’s speed record, was built especially for the
Museum’s collection (USNM 313161), and was the gift in 1947 of the New
York Central System. Constructed by Edwin P. Alexander of Yardley, Pa.,
it is about 15 inches long with tender and is accompanied by a train of
four model cars of the period. Locomotive and cars are built to a scale
of ¼ inch to the foot.

    [Illustration: Figure 69.—Model of New York Central American-type
    locomotive _999_, 1893.]

One of the best known of all locomotives, the New York Central and
Hudson River Railroad’s _999_, with engineer Charles H. Hogan at the
throttle, reached a speed of 112½ miles an hour over a measured mile on
May 10, 1893, while pulling the Empire State Express westward between
Batavia and Buffalo, N. Y. This was a new world’s record, and the _999_
was shortly withdrawn from active service and placed on exhibition at
the World’s Columbian Exposition at Chicago.

At the conclusion of the exposition it was again placed in service with
the Empire State Express, but was later withdrawn because, although
having great speed with a light train, it lacked the pulling power
required for the larger and heavier trains then coming into use. Today,
the _999_, altered somewhat, and with smaller driving wheels than when
built, is preserved by the New York Central System as one of its
historic relics. It is usually to be seen at the Collinwood shops near
Cleveland, Ohio, but it still occasionally appears at fairs and
expositions.

Designed by the superintendent of motive power, William Buchanan, and
constructed at the West Albany shops of the New York Central, the _999_
is of the 4-4-0, or American, type and was fitted originally with
86-inch driving wheels. The bore and stroke of the cylinders are 19 and
24 inches, respectively, and a steam pressure of 180 pounds per square
inch was used. The fuel was bituminous coal. The extreme wheelbase is
287 inches, and the distance between the two driving axles is 102
inches. The weight of the locomotive is 124,000 pounds, that of the
loaded tender is 80,000.


                 American-Type Locomotive of about 1900

Through the bequest in 1955 of John Semple Clarke, a model (figure 70)
formerly lent by him to the Museum has been added to the collection
(USNM 314615). A 4-4-0 of exquisite workmanship in brass and steel, the
model is 21 inches long and has a gauge of 2½ inches.

It was constructed during the 7-year period from 1907 to 1914 by George
Boshart, a toolmaker of Brookline, near Philadelphia, Pa. All rotating
and reciprocating parts are operable, though the boiler is apparently
not capable of generating steam. There is no tender with the locomotive,
none having been built.

It is not definitely known what, if any, original locomotive the model
represents, but some of its details are similar to those of locomotives
built at the turn of the century by the Schenectady Locomotive Works.
While it has been stated that Boshart patterned the model after a
Pennsylvania Railroad locomotive with which he was familiar, in certain
of its details the model does not appear to justify this claim. The
number on the model represents the year in which its construction was
started.

    [Illustration: Figure 70.—Model of an American-type locomotive of
    about 1900.]


                    British Locomotive of about 1905

In the national collection is an operable model (figure 71) of a British
locomotive of the period of about 1905. Made by the well known English
model makers Carson and Co., and given in 1933 to the Museum by Frank A.
Wardlaw and Frank A. Wardlaw, Jr., the model (USNM 310584) represents
the Caledonian Railway Co. _No. 903_, a 4-6-0 with inside cylinders. The
length of the locomotive and the 6-wheeled tender is 45 inches and the
gauge is 3¼ inches. A locomotive of similar appearance, though not
necessarily identical, is described and illustrated in the British
technical journal “Engineering” for August 31, 1906 (p. 299).

The elder Wardlaw stated that the model was built by Carson for Sir
Henry Lopes, and that he acquired it from Carson when Sir Henry turned
it in on a new one. Wardlaw believed this gasoline-fueled model to have
been the first model locomotive ever built with a flash boiler.

A letter from James C. Crebbin in the July 27, 1933, issue of the
British journal “The Model Engineer and Practical Electrician,” contains
the following statement:

  When I was chairman of Messrs. Carson and Co., the late Mr. James
  Carson and I collaborated in the development of flash steam model
  locomotives.

  With the exception of the very small model L. & N. W. “Experiment”
  loco which had only one coil, and a methylated vaporising burner, the
  boilers had longitudinal coils running the full length of the boiler,
  and were fired by means of a Carson Primus type burner. The pressure
  container was a drum inside the tender, and was surrounded by water in
  the usual square or oblong tank. This water fed the geared pump, which
  was driven from the second tender axle.

  The most successful of this type was a ¾-inch-scale 4-4-0 Caledonian,
  built for Sir Henry Lopes. Mr. Carson always declared that this engine
  was the fastest he had ever seen, and during tests he carried out, on
  Sir Henry’s track, never dared to give the model more than
  half-throttle, no matter what load the engine was hauling.

  Mr. Wardlaw, of New York, and a “M. E.” Exhibition Championship Cup
  Holder, has a similar locomotive which, I believe, is destined for
  exhibition in some museum in U. S. A.

    [Illustration: Figure 71.—Operable model of a British locomotive of
    about 1905.]


                        British Locomotive, 1905

An operable model (figure 72) of locomotive _No. 146_ of the Ferrocarril
Oeste of Argentina was presented to the Museum (USNM 310585) in 1933 by
Frank A. Wardlaw and Frank A. Wardlaw, Jr. The 22-inch-long model has a
gauge of 2½ inches. Gasoline carried in the tender is used as fuel. The
builder is not known.

    [Illustration: Figure 72.—Operable model of a British locomotive,
    1905.]

The original locomotive _No. 146_, a 4-4-4-T type with a cowcatcher and
outside cylinders, was built in 1905 by Beyer, Peacock & Co., Ltd., of
Manchester, England. The locomotive and tender have a common frame.
According to a small plate affixed to the model, the original was the
first locomotive to be fitted with “Wardlaw’s composite clackvalve.”
This invention of the elder Wardlaw was installed at Buenos Aires in
January 1908, according to the legend on the plate.

The original _Greyhound_ was locomotive _No. 302_ of the London and
North-Western Railway Co., built in 1905 at the Crewe works of the
company. Of the 4-4-0 type, the locomotive had inside cylinders and was
the first in Europe to be fitted with “Wardlaw’s composite clackvalve.”
This was done in August 1910.

The model of the locomotive and its 6-wheeled tender (figure 73) is 29
inches long and has a gauge of 2½ inches. It is operable, using gasoline
carried in the tender as fuel. The builder is not known.

The donors, Frank A. Wardlaw and Frank A. Wardlaw, Jr., presented the
model (USNM 310586) to the Museum in 1933.

    [Illustration: Figure 73.—Operable model of British locomotive
    _Greyhound_, 1905.]


              Pennsylvania Atlantic-Type Locomotive, 1907

The Atlantic-type steam locomotive is represented in the Museum
collection by a nonoperable model (figure 74) lent to the Museum in 1922
by E. Howard Askew of Baltimore, Md. Constructed by the lender, the
model (USNM 307949) is 32 inches long and has a gauge of 2½ inches.

It represents the Pennsylvania Railroad class E3sd _No. 5127_, a 4-4-2
steam locomotive with Walschaert valve gear. The original locomotive was
built at the railroad’s Juniata shops, Altoona, Pa., in August 1907,
construction No. 1734. Originally a class E3d locomotive, it was
converted to an E3sd in June 1913 by the addition of a superheater in
the Wilmington, Del., shops of the road.

    [Illustration: Figure 74.—Model of Pennsylvania Atlantic-type
    locomotive, 1907.]

In a letter to Askew (Dec. 14, 1922) the chief of motive power of the
Pennsylvania System, J. T. Wallis, stated that the cylinders of the
original had a bore and stroke of 22 and 26 inches. The drivers were 80
inches in diameter and the boiler carried a steam pressure of 205
pounds. The boiler had a minimum (internal) diameter of 65½ inches, and
it contained 170 2-inch flues and 24 5½-inch flues, while the
superheater consisted of 96 1½-inch flues. The distance between flue
sheets was 180 inches and the total heating surface was 2,571 square
feet. The grate was 111 inches long and 72 wide.

The total weight on the drivers was 127,200 pounds, on the engine truck
35,500 pounds, and on the trailer truck 33,900 pounds—or a total of
196,600 pounds in working order. The weight of the tender in working
order was 134,000 pounds. The tractive force of the locomotive was
27,409 pounds.

In his letter Wallis also made the following statement to explain the
significance of the modification of this class of locomotive:

  The Atlantic, or 4-4-2, type locomotive was developed in an effort to
  retain the desirable features of the American, or 4-4-0, type of
  locomotive and at the same time to produce a locomotive in answer to
  the demand for greater power. To do this, the firebox was increased in
  area by making it considerably wider, so that a greater amount of soft
  coal could be burned. The diameter of the barrel of the boiler was
  increased to allow for greater heating surface, which, of course,
  increased the weight on the drivers.

  To make room for the driving wheels without unduly increasing the
  length of the tubes in the boiler, the driving wheels were moved
  forward, the main driver being in the rear instead of in front as in
  the American type locomotive. In order to carry the weight of the
  firebox, which, with the new driving wheel location, overhangs the
  rear driver too much to be properly supported, a two-wheel trailer
  truck was used. This trailer truck, which is fulcrumed a short
  distance back of the main driver, is so designed that it has lateral
  motion, and provision is made for ash pan as well as firebox
  clearance.

  By the use of higher steam pressure, larger heating surface and grate
  area, the use of passenger locomotives of the three-coupled type, with
  the troubles incident to the use of long parallel rods, was put off
  for a decade.


                   General Electric Locomotive, 1926

A detailed and exquisitely made operable model of the New York Central
class T-3A electric locomotive _No. 1173_, now _No. 273_, was
constructed by W. Howard R. Parsons, and was donated by him in 1952 to
the Museum (USNM 314237).

The model (figure 75) is powered by eight electric motors, as is the
full sized original, one for each axle, but because of space limitations
and power requirements the model’s drive is through gears rather than
direct. The model operates on 12-volt direct current. Its length is 43
inches and its gauge is 3½ inches.

The New York Central System purchased 10 class T-3A locomotives in late
1926 at a cost of $100,000 each. These supplemented an earlier group of
10 T-1’s and 16 T-2’s built for the New York Central from 1913 to 1917
at the Erie, Pa., plant of the General Electric Co. Of this total of 36
locomotives only one, _No. 270_ (formerly _No. 1170_), had been stricken
from the records as of December 1954. The remaining 35 still perform
routine passenger service between New York and Harmon, and New York and
North White Plains. The numbers in the group now run from 247 to 282
(formerly 1147 to 1182), with the exception of the scrapped _No. 270_.

    [Illustration: Figure 75.—Operable model of General Electric
    locomotive, 1926.]

With an operating weight of 292,600 pounds, the locomotives of the T-3A
class develop 1,908 horsepower continuously, with a tractive force of
12,750 pounds, and they can develop 2,488 horsepower for 1 hour, with a
tractive force of 18,440 pounds. The maximum speed of a T-3A is 75 miles
an hour. These locomotives operate on 660-volt direct current, usually
obtained from a third rail. The pantographs are used only when crossing
certain complicated crossover switches. Each of the eight axles is
driven by its individual gearless motor. The overall wheelbase is 46
feet, 5 inches, the overall length 56 feet, 10 inches.


           B & O Hudson-Type Locomotive Lord Baltimore, 1935

During the winter of 1936-1937, The Baltimore and Ohio Railroad Co.
conducted in conjunction with the magazine “The Model Craftsman” a
contest among model builders for the construction of a model of the
railroad’s Washington-to-Jersey City lightweight, streamlined train, the
“Royal Blue,” first placed in operation on June 24, 1935.

    [Illustration: Figure 76.—Model of B & O Hudson-type locomotive
    _Lord Baltimore_, 1935.]

The contest, with a first prize of $500, was won by Fletcher G. Speed of
New Rochelle, N. Y., and his prize-winning train (figure 76) was
presented by the Baltimore and Ohio in 1937 to the National Museum (USNM
311191). The train consists of the Hudson-type, or 4-6-4, steam
locomotive _Lord Baltimore_ and tender, together 2 feet long, plus five
cars. Beautiful in workmanship, and powered with a small electric motor,
the model is built to a scale of ¼ inch to the foot.

The original locomotive _Lord Baltimore_ was designed by the Baltimore
and Ohio, and was constructed at the company’s Mount Clare shops in
Baltimore. The weight of the locomotive and tender in working order was
527,000 pounds, and the tractive force was 38,000 pounds. The driving
wheels were 84 inches in diameter, and the driving wheelbase was 178
inches. The bore and stroke of the cylinders were 20 and 28 inches,
respectively, Walschaert valve gear was used, and a steam pressure of
350 pounds per square inch was employed. The fuel was bituminous coal.

On September 11, 1935, an average speed of 59.28 miles an hour was
obtained between Washington and Jersey City while pulling a dynamometer
car and five other cars. Although designated as _No. 2_ when built in
1935, the locomotive was changed to _No. 5340_ in 1942. As it was not
designed to handle standard weight trains, the locomotive was later
removed from service, and after being in storage for several years was
scrapped on July 19, 1949.


                  Lima Northern-Type Locomotive, 1937

A black, red, and orange nonoperable model (figure 77) in the collection
represents the Southern Pacific Co. _No. 4410_, the first of the many
such streamlined 4-8-4, or Northern-type, steam locomotives built for
that line. This model of _No. 4410_ and its tender, about 27 inches
long, is built to the scale of ¼ inch to the foot. The gift of the
Southern Pacific Co. in 1937, it was made early in that year especially
for the Museum’s collection (USNM 311340).

The first group of this type of streamliner, which was the conception of
George McCormick and Frank E. Russell of the Southern Pacific, was
completed by the Lima Locomotive Works in January 1937. The first run
with one of these streamliners was made on March 21 with the “Coast
Daylight” passenger train between San Francisco and Los Angeles.

Of the total of 50 essentially similar locomotives of this streamlined
class, the Southern Pacific still had 49 in November 1954, only _No.
4414_ having been authorized for scrapping. At that time, these
locomotives had averaged approximately 13,000 miles a month since being
placed in service, although many had completed over 15,000 miles in
particularly productive months. The earlier ones, represented by this
model, developed 4,500 horsepower at 55 miles an hour and had a top
speed of 90 miles an hour, although 75 was the highest allowable
operating speed. They were able to maintain a 9¾-hour schedule between
San Francisco and Los Angeles.

    [Illustration: Figure 77.—Model of Lima Northern-type locomotive,
    1937.]

The locomotive and tender are 108 feet long, and weigh 835,000 pounds in
operating condition. The fuel is bunker type C oil. A boiler pressure of
250 pounds per square inch is employed. The cylinder bore is 27 inches,
the stroke 30. The eight drivers are 73 inches in diameter, and the
driving wheelbase is 20 feet. The later streamlined 4-8-4’s of the
Southern Pacific develop 5,500 horsepower at 55 miles an hour, and
operate on a boiler pressure of 300 pounds per square inch.


                   General Electric Locomotive, 1938

A nonoperable model (figure 78) of the first of six 2-C+C-2 streamlined
electric locomotives built by the General Electric Co. for The New York,
New Haven and Hartford Railroad Co. was made especially for the Museum
collection (USNM 311880) by the builder of these locomotives. The model,
constructed in the Bridgeport, Conn., plant of the General Electric Co.
and presented to the Museum in 1940, is of plaster painted green and
black, with gold trim. It is 31 inches long and has a gauge of 1¾
inches.

The electric locomotives represented by this model were built in 1938 at
the Erie, Pa., plant of the General Electric Co. for passenger service
between New Haven and New York. Originally numbered from 0361 to 0366,
they are now numbered from 360 to 365.

    [Illustration: Figure 78.—Model of General Electric locomotive,
    1938.]

On the New Haven tracks these 77-foot-long locomotives operate on
11,000-volt, single-phase, 25-cycle, alternating current obtained from
an overhead trolley system. On the New York Central tracks they operate
on 660-volt direct current obtained usually from a third rail, but
occasionally from an overhead supply at some crossover switches. For
this latter purpose a small auxiliary pantograph is used. Control
equipment is, of course, provided for both types of power supply.

The fully loaded weight is 433,200 pounds, of which 272,400 pounds is on
the twelve 56-inch drivers. While operating on alternating current, the
continuous tractive force is 24,100 pounds, and the continuously
available horsepower 3,600. The maximum available horsepower from the
six twin-armature, 12-pole motors is 7,600. Slightly different results
are obtained while operating on direct current. The maximum safe speed
is 93 miles an hour.


          American Locomotive Co. Hudson-Type Locomotive, 1938

Development of the original Hudson-type locomotives began in 1926 when
the New York Central System decided it needed a new type of passenger
locomotive to meet the demands of high-speed, long-distance runs. The
type was named after the river along which it would run. In late 1937
and in 1938, 50 Hudsons of an improved design, built by the American
Locomotive Co., were placed on the New York Central. These locomotives,
Nos. 5405 to 5454, had larger boilers than their predecessors, had
greater tractive force, and were fitted with roller bearings. In
addition, Nos. 5445 to 5454 were streamlined.

A nonoperable model (figure 79) in the Museum collection (USNM 313162),
gift of the New York Central System in 1947, represents _No. 5429_. The
model locomotive and tender are 2 feet long and are accompanied by a
train of six streamlined cars. The entire train is painted silver, with
black trimming on the locomotive and tender. Built to a scale of ¼ inch
to the foot, it was especially made for the Museum, the builder being
Edwin P. Alexander of Yardley, Pa.

    [Illustration: Figure 79.—Model of American Locomotive Co.
    Hudson-type locomotive, 1938.]

The original _No. 5429_, constructed in 1938, was streamlined in 1941 in
the West Albany shops of the New York Central, and in December of that
year was placed back in service on the Empire State Express with an
entirely new streamlined train of specially designed stainless-steel
cars. When the Empire State Express was ultimately dieselized in 1945,
_No. 5429_ was put to other uses, and the streamlining was removed in
1950. As of October 1955 it was still in service.

In streamlined condition, as represented by the model, the locomotive
and tender together weighed 681,900 pounds and their length was a few
inches over 97 feet. The diameter of the driving wheels was 79 inches,
the bore and stroke of the cylinders were 22½ and 29 inches,
respectively, and the total tractive force was 53,960 pounds. A steam
pressure of 265 pounds per square inch was used.


       Baldwin-Westinghouse Geared Steam-Turbine Locomotive, 1944

A radical departure from the usual design for a coal-burning steam
locomotive, and the first of its type built in this country, was the
noncondensing geared steam-turbine locomotive built jointly by The
Baldwin Locomotive Works and the Westinghouse Electric and Manufacturing
Co. Constructed in 1944 at Baldwin’s Eddystone plant (Westinghouse
manufactured the turbines and gears), it was designated Pennsylvania
Railroad Co. class S-2 locomotive _No. 6200_.

This locomotive, combining the work of two pioneers in the railroad
equipment field, is represented in the Museum collection by a
nonoperable model (figure 80) made especially for the Museum (USNM
312935) and presented to it by The Baldwin Locomotive Works early in
1946. The locomotive and tender, together 30 inches long, were built to
a scale of ¼ inch to the foot by Minton Cronkhite of Pasadena, Calif.

Two steam turbines, similar to the type that drive the larger fighting
ships of the U.S. Navy, powered the original locomotive. The more
complex and powerful of the two, the forward-drive turbine, developed a
maximum of 7,250 horsepower and was at all times engaged with the
wheels. (Although 6,500 horsepower has usually been the quoted figure
for the forward-drive turbine, 7,250 was actually developed on October
22, 1946, at the Altoona Locomotive Testing Plant.) The simpler one, for
reverse only, developed 1,500 horsepower and was normally disengaged
from the driving wheels except while actually being used.

The boiler, frame, trucks, and driving wheels were of the conventional
type, the most notable visible difference between the locomotive and
those of other types being the absence of cylinders, valve motion, and
their accompanying parts. Because of the elimination of piston rods and
other reciprocating parts it was possible to balance almost perfectly
the driving wheels, thus permitting a higher operating speed than
normally practical with a conventional locomotive.

The weight of the locomotive alone was 580,000 pounds, and its forward
tractive force was 70,500 pounds. A 6-8-6 wheel arrangement was
employed, the driving wheel diameter was 68 inches, and a speed of 100
miles an hour was possible. The working steam pressure was 310 pounds
per square inch. Bituminous coal served as the fuel. A detailed and well
illustrated description of this locomotive appears in the magazine
“Baldwin” (for the fourth quarter of 1944).

The locomotive covered 103,050 miles in passenger service, and was then
set aside on June 11, 1949, because it was in need of repairs to the
firebox and flues, and also to the turbines, oil pumps, and gears. At
that time all passenger service on the Pennsylvania was being changed to
diesel-electric operation, so the locomotive was ultimately scrapped on
May 29, 1952.

    [Illustration: Figure 80.—Model of Baldwin-Westinghouse geared
    steam-turbine locomotive, 1944.]


            General Motors Diesel-Electric Locomotive, 1945

A nonoperable model of a diesel-electric locomotive (figure 81) was
given to the Museum (USNM 313163) by the New York Central System in
1947. This gray and black model, which is 33 inches long and is built to
a scale of ¼ inch to the foot, represents the General Motors 2-unit
diesel-electric _No. 4000-4001_ of the New York Central, a type placed
in service with the Empire State Express in 1945 to replace the
Hudson-type steam locomotives described on page 99. The model was
especially built for the Museum’s collection, the builder being Edwin P.
Alexander of Yardley, Pa.

The overall length of the two full sized units is just over 140 feet and
their combined weight is 646,000 pounds. Each end of each unit is
supported by a 6-wheeled truck, and the wheel diameter is 36 inches
throughout.

Each unit is equipped with two General Motors 12-cylinder V-type 2-cycle
diesel engines having a bore of 8½ inches and a stroke of 10 inches, and
developing 1,000 horsepower at 800 revolutions per minute, a total of
4,000 horsepower for the two units combined. Each engine is directly
coupled to a generator that supplies direct current to the two traction
motors, geared, respectively, to the front and rear axles of its
corresponding truck. No power is applied to the center axle, which is
for weight distribution only. The joint tractive force of the two units
is 108,950 pounds.

    [Illustration: Figure 81.—Model of General Motors diesel-electric
    locomotive, 1945.]




                            PICTURE CREDITS


  _Figure_
  1.—Museum photo 25370
  2.—Museum photo 2720
  3.—Museum photo 23554
  4.—Museum photo 43102
  5.—Museum photo 43130
  6.—Museum photo 16534
  7.—Museum photo 43586-B
  8.—Museum photo 16048
  9.—Museum photo 31975
  10.—Museum photo 43076-B
  11.—Museum photo 43076
  12.—Museum photo 30571-A
  13.—Museum photo 32367-E
  14.—Museum Chaney photo 24478
  15.—Photo courtesy Baltimore and Ohio Railroad Co.
  16.—Museum photo 43054-A
  17.—Photo courtesy Baltimore and Ohio Railroad Co.
  18.—Museum photo 13225-B
  19.—Museum photo 43586
  20.—Photo courtesy Redwood Library
  21.—Photo courtesy Southern Railway System
  22.—Museum photo 43054
  23.—Museum photo 25012-B
  24.—Museum photo 43076-A
  25.—Museum photo 43060
  26-27.—Photos from Chaney collection
  28.—Museum photo 31959-A
  29.—Museum photo 14293
  30.—Museum photo 34328
  31.—Museum photo 29759-A
  32.—Museum photo 16538
  33.—Museum Chaney photo 8810
  34.—Museum photo 21243-C
  35.—Museum Chaney photo 13758
  36.—Photo courtesy Pennsylvania Railroad Co.
  37.—Museum photo 23552
  38.—Museum Chaney photo 1429
  39.—Museum Chaney photo 1457
  40.—Museum Chaney photo 13528
  41.—Photo courtesy Baltimore and Ohio Railroad Co.
  42.—Museum photo 32097-A
  43-45.—Photos courtesy Baltimore and Ohio Railroad Co.
  46-47.—Photos courtesy Chicago and North Western Railway System
  48.—Museum Chaney photo 20295
  49.—Photo courtesy Baltimore and Ohio Railroad Co.
  50.—Museum photo 43094
  51.—Museum photo 43182
  52.—Museum Chaney photo 13799
  53.—Museum photo 43083
  54.—Museum photo 30457
  55.—Museum Chaney photo 13538
  56.—Photo courtesy Reading Co.
  57-58.—Photos courtesy University of Maine
  59.—Photo courtesy Baltimore and Ohio Railroad Co.
  60.—Museum Chaney photo 10314
  61.—Museum photo 26977-B
  62.—Museum photo 30397
  63.—Museum photo 43299
  64.—Museum photo 26981-B
  65.—Museum photo 26974-A
  66.—Museum photo 26899-A
  67.—Museum photo 43598
  68.—Museum photo 43299-E
  69.—Museum photo 43297
  70.—Museum photo 26847-H
  71.—Museum photo 43298
  72.—Museum photo 43298-A
  73.—Museum photo 43298-B
  74.—Museum photo 43299-A
  75.—Museum photo 42272
  76.—Museum photo 43299-B
  77.—Museum photo 43299-C
  78.—Museum photo 43299-D
  79.—Museum photo 43297-A
  80.—Museum photo 43293
  81.—Museum photo 43297-B




                            ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


The author wishes to express his appreciation for the help given him by
the many individuals, including railroad officials, librarians, and
museum curators, who provided answers to many questions and confirmed
many conjectures.

Special thanks are tendered A. B. Lawson and Lawrence W. Sagle of The
Baltimore and Ohio Railroad Co., F. V. Koval of the Chicago and North
Western Railway System, W. F. Kascal and Harry B. Spurrier of the New
York Central System, H. T. Cover of the Pennsylvania Railroad Co., Harry
E. Hammer of the Reading Co., K. C. Ingram of the Southern Pacific Co.,
Elizabeth O. Cullen of the Association of American Railroads, D. M.
MacMaster of the Museum of Science and Industry at Chicago, H. D. Watson
of the University of Maine, George M. Hart of George School in Bucks
County, Pa., and Robert R. Brown of Lachine, Quebec—to name a few of
those whose contributions have helped bring together the facts here
presented.

It is fitting also at this time to refer to the late Charles B. Chaney,
who collected over a period of almost 60 years an immense number of
photographs, negatives, drawings, lithographs, and books dealing with
railroading. Upon his death in 1948, he left this entire collection to
the United States National Museum, of the Smithsonian Institution,
confident that in the Museum it would be put to the widest possible use
and would, therefore, carry forward his lifelong work of research in the
history of locomotives and railroads.

His confidence was well founded. The Chaney collection of railroad
material has been an invaluable source of information for the present
work.

To acknowledge the contribution of Thomas Norrell of Silver Spring, Md.,
is likewise a pleasure. He graciously consented to read the manuscript
of this work, and his authoritative comments have greatly enhanced its
comprehensiveness and accuracy.




                              BIBLIOGRAPHY


  Austin, Erastus Long, and Hauser, Odell
    1929.  The Sesqui-Centennial International Exposition. Current
          Publications, Inc., Philadelphia.
  [Baldwin Locomotive Works]
    1922 et seq. _Baldwin Locomotives._ (_Baldwin_ with first issue of
          1944.) Philadelphia.
    1923. History of the Baldwin Locomotive Works, 1831-1923. Printed by
          the Bingham Co., Philadelphia.
  [Baltimore and Ohio Rail Road Co.]
    1827 et seq. Baltimore and Ohio Rail Road Company annual reports.
          Baltimore.
  Bell, J. Snowden
    1912. The early motive power of the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad.
          Angus Sinclair Co., New York.
  Brown, William H.
    1871. The history of the first locomotives in America. D. Appleton
          and Co., New York. (A second, revised, edition appeared in
          1874.)
  Burgess, George H., and Kennedy, Miles C.
    1949. Centennial history of the Pennsylvania Railroad Company. The
          Pennsylvania Railroad Co., Philadelphia.
  [Delaware and Hudson Co.]
    1925. A century of progress—History of the Delaware and Hudson
          Company, 1823-1923. Printed by J. B. Lyon Co., Albany, N. Y.
  Dendy Marshall, C. F.
    1928. Two essays in early locomotive history. The Locomotive
          Publishing Co., Ltd., London.
  Derrick, Samuel Melanchthon
    1930. Centennial history of South Carolina Railroad. The State Co.,
          Columbia, S. C.
  Forney, M. N.
    1886. Locomotives and locomotive building, being a brief sketch of
          the growth of the railroad system and of the various
          improvements in locomotive building in America together with a
          history of the origin and growth of the Rogers Locomotive and
          Machine Works, Paterson, New Jersey, from 1831 to 1886.
          Printed by Wm. S. Gottsberger, New York.
  [German State Railways]
    1935. Hundert Jahre deutsche Eisenbahnen. Germany.
  Harrison, Joseph, Jr.
    1872. The locomotive engine, and Philadelphia’s share in its early
          improvements. George Gebbie, Philadelphia.
  Hinchman, Walter S.
    1913. Holmes Hinkley, an industrial pioneer, 1793-1866. Riverside
          Press, Cambridge, Mass.
  Hungerford, Edward
    1928. The story of the Baltimore & Ohio Railroad, 1827-1927. G. P.
          Putnam’s Sons, New York.
    1938. Men and iron—The history of New York Central. Thomas Y.
          Crowell Co., New York.
  [Pennsylvania Railroad Co.]
    1893. Catalogue of the exhibit of the Pennsylvania Railroad Company
          at the World’s Columbian Exposition. Chicago.
  Pittenger, William
    1893. The Great Locomotive Chase. Jones and Stanley, New
  [Railway and Locomotive Historical Society]
    1921 et seq. Railway and Locomotive Historical Society bulletins.
          Boston, Mass.
  Renwick, James
    1830. Treatise on the steam engine. G. & C. & H. Carvill, New York.
  Sagle, Lawrence W.
    1952. A picture history of B & O motive power. Simmons-Boardman
          Publishing Corp., New York.
  Sinclair, Angus
    1907. Development of the locomotive engine. D. Van Nostrand Co., New
          York.
  Stevens, Frank Walker
    1926. The beginnings of the New York Central Railroad—A history. G.
          P. Putnam’s Sons, New York.
  Warner, Paul T.
    1934. Locomotive Number 3, Peoples’ Railway. Unpublished manuscript
          in the files of The Franklin Institute, Philadelphia.
  Warren, J. G. H.
    1923. A century of locomotive building by Robert Stephenson & Co.,
          1823-1923. Andrew Reid & Co., Ltd., Newcastle-upon-Tyne.
  Watkins, J. Elfreth
    1891. The Camden and Amboy Railroad—Origin and Early History, an
          address appearing in Ceremonies upon the completion of the
          monument erected by the Pennsylvania Railroad Company at
          Bordentown, New Jersey, to mark the first piece of track laid
          between New York and Philadelphia in 1831. William F. Roberts,
          Washington, D. C.
  Young, Robert
    1923. Timothy Hackworth and the locomotive. The Locomotive
          Publishing Co., Ltd., London.




                                 INDEX


                                   A
  _Albion_, locomotive, 64, 65
  Albion Mines Railway, 64
  _Alert_, locomotive, 53
  Alexander, Edwin P., 87, 100, 102
  Allegheny, ship, 39
  Allen, Horatio, 14, 16, 27
  Altoona Locomotive Testing Plant, 101
  _America_, locomotive, 14, 16, 17, 20, 42
  American Locomotive Co., 99
  _Andrew Jackson_, locomotive, 47, 48, 52
  _Arabian_, locomotive, 81, 82
  Askew, E. Howard, 92
  _Atlantic_, locomotive, 47, 48, 52, 81


                                    B
  Bain, Robert E. M., 86
  Baldwin, Matthias W., 53, 54, 59, 61, 71, 72, 81
  Baldwin Locomotive Works, 67, 80, 100, 101
  Ballauf, D., 31, 76, 83
  Baltimore & Ohio Railroad Co., 22, 24, 25, 47, 58, 59, 65, 71, 73,
          81, 82, 95, 96
  Baltimore and Ohio Transportation Museum, 9, 22, 47, 52, 59, 74
  Beaver Meadow Rail Road and Coal Co., 67
  Bell, J. Snowden, 58, 73
  _Best Friend of Charleston_, locomotive, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31
  Beyer, Peacock & Co., Ltd., 91
  Booth, Henry, 80
  Boshart, George, 88
  _Boston_, locomotive, 67, 68
  Braithwaite, Milner and Co., 60, 67
  Brown, William H., 28
  Buchanan, William, 33, 88
  Burnham, Parry, Williams & Co., 80


                                    C
  Caledonian Railway Co., 89
  Camden and Amboy Rail Road and Transportation Co., 38, 42, 81
  Carillon Park, 47
  Carson and Co., 89, 90
  _Catch-me-who-can_, locomotive, 77, 78
  Centennial Exhibition at Philadelphia, 43
  Champlain and St. Lawrence Railroad, 64
  Chattanooga Station Co., 31
  Chicago, Burlington and Quincy, 54
  Chicago and North Western Railway Co., 53, 54, 55, 59
  Chicago Railroad Fair, 21, 22, 31, 35, 46, 55, 59
  Chicago World’s Fair, 21, 22, 24, 35, 44, 55, 57, 59
  Cincinnati Centennial Exposition, 31
  Clarke, John Semple, 88
  Coast Daylight, train, 97
  Codorus, ship, 47
  Collinwood shops, 88
  Columbia, ship, 14
  Columbia Avenue station, 62
  Columbia and Philadelphia Rail Road, 66
  _Columbus_, locomotive, 52
  _Conestoga_, locomotive, 68
  Congress, ship, 14
  Cooper, Peter, 22
  Crebbin, James C., 90
  Crewe works, 92
  Cronkhite, Minton, 101
  Crosby Mechanical Laboratory, 69, 70


                                    D
  Darrell, Nicholas W., 29
  Davidson, George, 65
  Davis, Harvey N., 12
  Davis, Phineas, 24, 25, 47, 81
  _Delaware_, locomotive, 61
  Delaware and Hudson Canal, 16
  Delaware and Hudson Canal Co., 14, 16, 17, 19
  Delaware and Hudson Railroad Corp., 21
  Dendy Marshall, C. F., 40, 60
  _De Witt Clinton_, locomotive, 32, 33, 35, 36
  _Dorchester_, locomotive, 64
  _Dragon_, locomotive, 71, 74
  Dripps, Isaac, 39
  Dunham, H. R., and Co., 55, 56


                                    E
  Eastwick, Andrew M., 68
  Eastwick and Harrison, 66, 67, 68
  Eddystone plant, 100
  Elgar, John, 47
  Empire State Express, train, 87, 88, 100
  Exposition of Railway Appliances, 43, 55, 65


                                    F
  Fair of the Iron Horse, 22, 24, 35, 44, 46, 59, 62, 66
  Ferrocarril Oeste of Argentina, 91
  Field Museum at Chicago, 57
  Fitch, John, 10
  Forward, E. A., 17
  Foster, Rastrick and Co., 14, 16
  Franklin Institute, The, 62, 67


                                    G
  Galena and Chicago Union Rail Road, 53
  Garber, Paul E., 20
  Gartner, Israel, 47, 81
  _General_, locomotive, 59, 84, 85
  General Electric Co., 94, 98
  General Mining Association, 64
  General Motors, 102
  Gillingham, George, 47, 52
  _Gowan and Marx_, locomotive, 66, 67
  Grand Central Terminal, 35
  Grand Gulf and Port Gibson Railroad, 56
  _Greyhound_, locomotive, 92


                                    H
  Hackworth, Timothy, 63, 64
  Harrison, Joseph, Jr., 66
  Hazard, Isaac P., 30
  Hazeldine and Rastrick, 77
  Hazelton and Lehigh Rail Road, 67
  Henry Ford Museum, 10, 35
  _Hercules_, locomotive, 64
  Hinkley, Holmes, 69, 70
  Hinkley and Drury, 69
  Hogan, Charles H., 87
  Homfray, Samuel, 77


                                    I
  Illinois Central Railroad Co., 56, 57
  _Indian Chief_, locomotive, 47


                                    J
  James, J. H., 83
  _Jason C. Pierce_, locomotive, 64
  _J. E. Thayer_, locomotive, 67, 68
  _John Buddle_, locomotive, 64
  _John Bull_, locomotive, 38, 39, 41, 42, 43, 44, 46, 81
  _John Hancock_, locomotive, 47, 52
  John Jay, ship, 14
  _John Quincy Adams_, locomotive, 47, 52
  Juniata shops, 93


                                    K
  Knight, Jonathan, 22


                                    L
  _Lafayette_, locomotive, 58, 59
  Lafayette, ship, 31
  Leipzig to Dresden Railroad, 52
  Lima Locomotive Works, 97
  Lindsay and Early, 17, 19
  _Lion_, locomotive, 69, 70, 71
  Liverpool and Manchester Railway, 79, 80
  Locomotives
      _Albion_, 64, 65
      _Alert_, 53
      _America_, 14, 16, 17, 20, 42
      _Andrew Jackson_, 47, 48, 52
      _Arabian_, 81, 82
      _Atlantic_, 47, 48, 52, 81
      _Best Friend of Charleston_, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31
      _Boston_, 67, 68
      _Catch-me-who-can_, 77, 78
      _Columbus_, 52
      _Conestoga_, 68
      _Delaware_, 61
      _De Witt Clinton_, 32, 33, 35, 36
      _Dorchester_, 64
      _Dragon_, 71, 74
      _General_, 59, 84, 85
      _Gowan and Marx_, 66, 67
      _Greyhound_, 92
      _Hercules_, 64
      _Indian Chief_, 47
      _Jason C. Pierce_, 64
      _J. E. Thayer_, 67, 68
      _John Buddle_, 64
      _John Bull_, 38, 39, 41, 42, 43, 44, 46, 81
      _John Hancock_, 47, 52
      _John Quincy Adams_, 47, 52
      _Lafayette_, 58, 59
      _Lion_, 69, 70, 71
      _Lord Baltimore_, 96
      _Martin Van Buren_, 47, 48
      _Mazeppa_, 48
      _Memnon_, 71, 72, 73, 74
      _Mississippi_, 55, 56, 57
      _Neversink_, 61
      _No. 2_, 96
      _No. 7_, 53
      _No. 13_, 58
      _No. 146_, 91
      _No. 302_, 92
      _No. 903_, 89
      _No. 999_, 87, 88
      _No. 1173_, 94
      _No. 4000-4001_, 102
      _No. 4410_, 97
      _No. 5127_, 92
      _No. 5340_, 96
      _No. 5429_, 99, 100
      _No. 6200_, 101
      _Old Ironsides_, 80, 81
      _Pawnee_, 68
      _Peoples’ Railway No. 3_, 67, 68, 69
      _Phoenix_, 29
      _Pioneer_, 53, 54, 55, 59, 73
      _Planet_, 81
      _Rocket_ (Braithwaite’s), 60, 61, 62, 67
      _Rocket_ (Stephenson’s), 9, 79, 80
      _Samson_, 63, 64, 65, 66
      _Sandusky_, 83, 84
      _Stourbridge Lion_, 14, 16, 17, 19, 20, 21, 27, 42
      _Thomas Jefferson_, 47, 52
      _Tiger_, 70
      _Tom Thumb_, 22, 24
      _Traveller_, 47, 52, 81
      _West Point_, 31
      _William Galloway_, 59
      _York_, 24, 25, 47, 52
  London and North-Western Railway Co., 92
  Lopes, Sir Henry, 89, 90
  _Lord Baltimore_, locomotive, 96
  Louisiana Purchase Exposition, 35, 55, 57
  Luscombe, C. R., 20, 46, 82


                                    M
  McCormick, George, 97
  Machiasport Railroad, 69
  Mad River and Lake Erie Railroad, 83
  _Martin Van Buren_, locomotive, 47, 48
  Matthew, David, 28, 32
  _Mazeppa_, locomotive, 48
  _Memnon_, locomotive, 71, 72, 73, 74
  Meridian, Brookhaven and Natchez Railroad, 56
  Mexican National Railways, 63
  Michigan Central Railroad, 53, 55
  Midgeholme Railway, 80
  _Mississippi_, locomotive, 55, 56, 57
  Mississippi Valley and Ship Island Railroad, 56
  Mohawk and Hudson Rail Road Co., 32, 38
  Morgan, Peyton L., 36
  Mount Clare shops, 96
  Mount Clare station, 9, 47
  Museum of Science and Industry, 10, 12, 24, 55


                                    N
  Nashua and Lowell Railroad, 69
  Nashville, Chattanooga & St. Louis Railway, 85
  Natchez & Hamburg R. R., 57
  _Neversink_, locomotive, 61
  New Castle Manufacturing Co., 66, 71
  New Jersey Railroad and Transportation Co., 83
  New York Central and Hudson River Railroad Co., 33, 35, 85, 87
  New York Central System, 35, 87, 88, 94, 99, 100, 102
  New York, New Haven and Hartford Railroad Co., 98
  New York World’s Fair, 12, 21, 22, 31, 35, 44, 46, 59
  Niagara, ship, 27
  _No. 2_, locomotive, 96
  _No. 7_, locomotive, 53
  _No. 13_, locomotive, 58
  _No. 146_, locomotive, 91
  _No. 302_, locomotive, 92
  _No. 903_, locomotive, 89
  _No. 999_, locomotive, 87, 88
  _No. 1173_, locomotive, 94
  _No. 4000-4001_, locomotive, 102
  _No. 4410_, locomotive, 97
  _No. 5127_, locomotive, 92
  _No. 5340_, locomotive, 96
  _No. 5429_, locomotive, 99, 100
  _No. 6200_, locomotive, 101
  Norris, William, 58, 59, 64


                                    O
  Ohio State Archaeological and Historical Society, 10
  _Old Ironsides_, locomotive, 80, 81


                                    P
  Parsons, W. Howard R., 94
  _Pawnee_, locomotive class, 68
  Pennsylvania Railroad Co., 12, 38, 39, 42, 43, 44, 92, 93, 101
  Pennsylvania Station, 12
  Pen-y-darran Iron Works, 77
  Peoples’ Railway, 67
  _Peoples’ Railway No. 3_, locomotive, 67, 68, 69
  Philadelphia and Reading Rail Road Co., 60, 61, 66, 67, 68, 72
  Philadelphia, Germantown and Norristown Rail-Road Co., 81
  Philadelphia Sesqui-Centennial International Exposition, 22
  _Phoenix_, locomotive, 29
  _Pioneer_, locomotive, 53, 54, 55, 59, 73
  _Planet_, locomotive class, 81
  Poore, Mrs. Townsend, 19
  Proprietors of Locks and Canals on Merrimack River, 66
  Prospect Hill Cemetery, 47


                                    R
  Rainhill Trials, 24, 79, 80
  Rayne and Burn, 64
  Reading Co., 67, 68
  Reading Terminal, 62
  Redwood Library, 29, 30
  Reeder, Charles, 47
  Robinson, Moncure, 66
  _Rocket_, locomotive (Braithwaite’s), 60, 61, 62, 67
  _Rocket_, locomotive (Stephenson’s), 9, 79, 80
  Rogers, Ketchum & Grosvenor, 83, 85
  Rogers, Thomas, 84
  Rounds, E. E., 70
  Royal Blue, train, 96
  Russell, Frank E., 97


                                    S
  Sagle, Lawrence W., 22
  _Samson_, locomotive, 63, 64, 65, 66
  _Sandusky_, locomotive, 83, 84
  Schenectady Locomotive Works, 86, 88
  Schutz, Adolph H., 85
  Schuylkill Canal, 61
  Science Museum, 17, 79, 80
  Sinclair, Angus, 55, 57
  Slade, G. T., 19
  South-Carolina Canal and Rail-Road Co., 27, 29, 30, 31
  South Pictou Railroad, 64
  Southern Pacific Co., 97, 98
  Southern Railway System, 30
  Speed, Fletcher G., 96
  Stephenson, Robert, 9, 42, 64, 79
  Stephenson, Robert, & Co., Ltd., 10, 14, 38, 80
  Stephenson, Robert, & Hawthorns, Ltd., 17
  Stevens, Col. John, 10, 11, 13, 38, 80
  Stevens, Dr. Francis B., 13
  Stevens, Robert L., 38, 39, 41
  Stevens Institute of Technology, 11, 12
  _Stourbridge Lion_, locomotive, 14, 16, 17, 19, 20, 21, 27, 42
  Suburban Station Building, 42


                                    T
  _Thomas Jefferson_, locomotive, 47, 52
  _Tiger_, locomotive, 70
  _Tom Thumb_, locomotive, 22, 24
  Towle, Thomas, 70
  _Traveller_, locomotive, 47, 52, 81
  Trevithick, Richard, 76, 77


                                    U
  Union Station at Chattanooga, 85
  University of Maine, 69, 71
  Utica and Schenectady Rail Road, 53


                                    W
  Wallis, J. T., 93
  Wardlaw, Frank A., 89, 90, 91, 92
  Wardlaw, Frank A., Jr., 89, 91, 92
  Warner, Paul T., 67, 68
  Warren, J. G. H., 41, 80
  Watkins, J. Elfreth, 13, 39, 40
  Wayne County Historical Society, 21
  West Albany shops, 35, 88, 100
  _West Point_, locomotive, 31
  West Point Foundry Association, 27, 28, 31, 32
  Western and Atlantic Railroad, 85
  Westinghouse Electric and Manufacturing Co., 100
  Whitney, A., & Sons, 68
  Whitneyville and Machiasport Railroad, 69
  _William Galloway_, locomotive, 59
  Wilmington, Del., shops, 93
  Winans, Ross, 47, 52, 61
  World’s Columbian Exposition, 35, 42, 44, 47, 55, 57, 62, 65, 87


                                    Y
  _York_, locomotive, 24, 25, 47, 52




                               FOOTNOTES


[1]The Museum catalog numbers of these are, respectively, USNM 180149,
    209826, 180030-A and 277700, and 180030-B.

[2]Davis and Gartner have an earlier claim to engineering fame, for in
    conjunction with John Elgar they had constructed in York, in 1825,
    the first American-built vessel with a metal hull, the sheet-iron
    steamboat _Codorus_.

[3]Although he spelled his name Gartner, and it appears in that form in
    the early annual reports of the Baltimore and Ohio Rail Road Co.,
    and in all subsequent histories of that road, his tombstone (in lot
    34, section H of the Prospect Hill Cemetery in York, Pa.) bears the
    name in its Anglicized form, Israel Gardner.

[4]The correct name of the builder of the _Rocket_, according to Dendy
    Marshall, was Braithwaite, Milner and Co. The two brass maker’s
    plates on the opposite sides of the front of the locomotive’s boiler
    read “Braithwaite & Co./ London./ March 1838.” However, as they are
    of the same size and shape as the shop plates of the Philadelphia
    and Reading in the early 1890’s, and as there was no plate on the
    locomotive in the late 1880’s (see figure 51), it is quite likely
    that these plates are not original with the locomotive. They were
    probably made and installed at the time it was refurbished for
    exhibition at Chicago in 1893.

[5]Railroads are known not to have existed in Mexico prior to 1850, and
    although locomotives of the 1825-1849 period could possibly have
    found their way into that country at some later date, none are to be
    found there today, according to advice from the Mexican National
    Railways (Ferrocarriles Nacionales de Mexico). Central America falls
    outside the scope of this work, as do the Islands of the Caribbean.
    However, a railroad was opened in Cuba in 1837, and another was
    started across the Isthmus of Panama in 1849 and completed in 1855
    (its first locomotive was received soon after the midcentury mark
    had been passed), so there is the remote possibility that somewhere
    in this area the remains of a pre-1850 locomotive could exist.


 For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U. S. Government Printing
                                 Office
                   Washington 25, D. C. - Price $1.00

                       U. S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1956 O-F—353689

    [Illustration: Uncaptioned railroad station.]




      *      *      *      *      *      *




Transcriber’s note:

—Silently corrected obvious typographical errors; left non-standard
 spellings and dialect unchanged.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FIRST QUARTER-CENTURY OF STEAM
LOCOMOTIVES IN NORTH AMERICA***


******* This file should be named 51976-0.txt or 51976-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/5/1/9/7/51976


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

