The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mary Frances Knitting and Crocheting
Book, by Jane Eayre Fryer

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Mary Frances Knitting and Crocheting Book
       or Adventures Among the Knitting People

Author: Jane Eayre Fryer

Illustrator: Jane Allen Boyer

Release Date: June 23, 2016 [EBook #52396]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MARY FRANCES KNITTING, CROCHETING ***




Produced by Emmy, MWS and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







[Illustration: SEE MY NEW SWEATER

FOR DIRECTIONS FOR MAKING KNITTED ARTICLES SHOWN IN THIS ILLUSTRATION
SEE KNITTED SLEEVELESS SWEATER—185 CROCHETED HAT—206 CROCHETED SPORTS
SWEATER—243]




[Illustration]

    THE
    MARY FRANCES
    KNITTING AND CROCHETING
    BOOK

    OR
    ADVENTURES AMONG THE
    KNITTING PEOPLE


    BY
    JANE EAYRE FRYER


    Illustrated by
    JANE ALLEN BOYER
    and from
    ACTUAL PHOTOGRAPHS


    THE JOHN C. WINSTON CO.
    PHILADELPHIA




    COPYRIGHT, 1918, BY
    JANE EAYRE FRYER

    ————CAUTION————
    The entire contents of this book are protected
    by copyright, and all persons are
    warned not to reproduce the text, in whole
    or in part, or any of the illustrations without
    permission of the publishers.




PREFACE


DEAR GIRLS:

After reading about Mary Frances’ many adventures among the Kitchen
People, and the Thimble People, and the Garden People, and with the
Doll Family and the Brave Family, in the Mary Frances books—perhaps you
thought that no girl, not even Mary Frances, could find any more funny
little fairy helpers right in her own home.

But Mary Frances did, for the Knitting People had overheard many of
the lessons which the Thimble People gave her, and they were almost
jealous. At least they probably would have been jealous if they had
not planned to surprise Mary Frances with some delightful lessons in
crocheting and knitting. Such good lessons they were that almost before
she knew it, Mary Frances had made the loveliest caps and sweaters and
bootees for her dolls—just exactly the kinds you want for your own
dolls. And you can have them if you wish, for Mary Frances says that
the Knitting People told her that they are always just as ready to help
any other girl who wants their help—if she will follow the lessons
exactly as they are given in this book.

She says, too, that after a girl has learned to crochet and knit for
dolls, it is “just as easy as a-b-c” to crochet and knit for real
people; and that knitting articles for soldier boys and fathers and
mothers makes a person feel of very much account.

It is in the hope that you will enjoy these new adventures as much as
Mary Frances did, that this book is sent out to the girls of America
with the best wishes of

                                                    THE AUTHOR.
    _Merchantville, N. J._




CONTENTS


    CHAPTER                                       PAGE
          I. KNIT AND KNACK                         15
         II. AUNT MARIA STEPS IN                    19
        III. CROW SHAY TALKS                        25
         IV. WOOLEY BALL TELLS SOME YARNS           29
          V. SPEAKING OF MOTHS                      35
         VI. CROW SHAY’S RELATIVES                  39
        VII. A DISAPPOINTMENT                       43
       VIII. A DOLL’S NECKLACE                      47
         IX. A TELEGRAM                             55
          X. MAKING PLANS                           61
         XI. A ROSE SCARF                           67
        XII. MARY MARIE’S SHAWL                     73
       XIII. FAIRLY FLEW FLIES IN                   79
        XIV. A LITTLE PETTICOAT                     83
         XV. MARY MARIE’S CAP                       93
        XVI. MARY MARIE’S TURBAN                    99
       XVII. MARY MARIE COMES TO LIFE              105
      XVIII. THE MAGIC RHYME                       113
        XIX. MARY MARIE’S SCHOOL BAG               117
         XX. A LETTER FROM MOTHER                  121
        XXI. A TEDDY BEAR SUIT                     127
       XXII. THE FIRST KNITTING LESSON             145
      XXIII. CASTING ON STITCHES                   149
       XXIV. CROW SHAY HELPS KNIT                  153
        XXV. TO KNIT A STITCH                      159
       XXVI. MARY FRANCES REALLY KNITS             165
      XXVII. DOING IT OVER AGAIN                   169
     XXVIII. DOLL’S KNITTED HOOD                   175
       XXIX. WHAT’S A PURL?                        179
        XXX. DOLL’S SLEEVELESS SWEATER             183
       XXXI. GOOD NEWS                             191
      XXXII. THE BOY AVIATOR                       195
     XXXIII. MARY MARIE’S SPORTS SWEATER           201
      XXXIV. HOME AGAIN                            215
       XXXV. A GIFT FROM THE QUEEN OF FAIRIES      219
      XXXVI. THE MAGIC PAPER                       225
     XXXVII. THE MAGIC PAPER (_Continued_)         227
    XXXVIII. TWO MORE SWEATERS                     262
      XXXIX. RED CROSS KNITTING                    265

[Illustration]




INSTRUCTIONS


                                                   PAGE
    DIFFERENT YARNS                                  31
    NAMES OF YARNS                                   32
    CROCHET HOOKS AND KNITTING NEEDLES               40
        SCALE OF SIZES                               41
    TO MAKE CHAIN STITCH                             48
    DOLL’S CROCHETED NECKLACE                        50
    TO MAKE SINGLE CROCHET                           51
    TO MAKE DOUBLE CROCHET                           52
    TO MAKE SLIP STITCH                              53
    DOLL’S CROCHETED SCARF                           69
    TO MAKE FRINGE                                   69
    DOLL’S CROCHETED SHAWL                           75
    TO JOIN ENDS OF YARN IN CROCHETING               76
    DOLL’S CROCHETED WOOL FLOSS SCARF                84
    DOLL’S CROCHETED PETTICOAT                       88
        HOW TO “INCREASE” IN CROCHETING              89
        TO MAKE THE SCALLOPS                         89
        TO MAKE THE RUNNER                           90
    DOLL’S CROCHETED TOQUE OR CAP                    93
        TO MAKE POMPONS                              95
    DOLL’S CROCHETED TURBAN (HAT)                    99
    BABY’S BALL                                     107
    HAIR PIN BALL                                   107
    DOLL’S CROCHETED BEDROOM SLIPPERS               108
        TO MAKE TASSELS                             111
    DOLL’S CROCHETED BOOK BAG                       118
    HOW TO MAKE AN INFANT YARN DOLL                 121
    HOW TO MAKE A COLORED YARN DOLL                 123
    TEDDY BEAR SUIT, CONSISTING OF—
        CROCHETED SWEATER                           129
        CROCHETED TAM                               135
        HOW TO “DECREASE” IN CROCHETING             137
        CROCHETED LEGGINGS                          138
    FIRST LESSON IN KNITTING—
        TO MAKE A SLIP KNOT                         148
        TO CAST ON STITCHES WITH THE FINGERS        150
        TO CAST ON STITCHES WITH A CROCHET HOOK     155
    TO KNIT PLAIN                                   162
        TO SLIP A STITCH                            163
        HOW TO BIND OFF                             166
    DOLL’S KNITTED SHAWL                            171
    DOLL’S KNITTED HOOD                             176
    DOLL’S KNITTED BEAN BAG                         180
    HOW TO PURL                                     180
    DOLL’S KNITTED SLEEVELESS SWEATER               185
        TO SLIP OFF STITCHES NEEDED LATER           186
        TO INCREASE OR ADD A STITCH IN KNITTING     186
    AVIATOR DOLL’S OUTFIT—
        KNITTED HELMET                              196
        KNITTED WRISTLETS                           196
        KNITTED SLEEVELESS SWEATER                  197
    DOLL’S KNITTED SPORTS SWEATER                   201
        TO DECREASE STITCHES IN KNITTING            202
    LITTLE CROCHETED HAT                            206
    DOLL’S CROCHETED MITTENS                        211
    TREBLE CROCHET                                  228
    INFANT DOLL’S CROCHETED OUTFIT—
        INFANT DOLL’S CROCHETED SOCKS               228
        INFANT DOLL’S CROCHETED CAP                 229
        INFANT DOLL’S CROCHETED SACQUE, NO. 1       230
            TO ATTACH NEW YARN                      231
        INFANT DOLL’S CROCHETED SACQUE, NO. 2       232
            AFGHAN STITCH                           234
        INFANT DOLL’S CROCHETED CAPE AND HOOD       236
    DOLL’S CROCHETED COACH COVER                    239
        COFFEE BEAN STITCH                          239
    DOLL’S CROCHETED SPORTS HAT                     240
    DOLL’S CROCHETED BREAKFAST CAP                  241
    DOLL’S CROCHETED GARTERS                        242
    DOLL’S CROCHETED SHOPPING BAG                   242
    DOLL’S CROCHETED SPORTS SWEATER                 243
    DOLL’S CROCHETED FLOWER BASKET                  246
    GIRL’S CROCHETED HAND BAG                       248
        CRAZY STITCH                                248
    BABY’S CROCHETED BOOTEES                        249
        STAR STITCH                                 251
    BABY’S CROCHETED BALL                           252
        CURLY STITCH                                252
    LADY’S CROCHETED NECKLACE                       253
    HOW TO MAKE BUTTON BALLS                        253
    BEAD STITCH                                     254
    LADY’S CROCHETED PURSE                          255
    HOW TO MAKE PICOT EDGING                        255
    DOLL’S KNITTED MUFF                             257
    DOLL’S KNITTED BOA OR STOLE                     257
    DOLL’S KNITTED BREAKFAST SHAWL                  259
    DOLL’S KNITTED SLEEVELESS SILK SWEATER          259
    HOW TO CAST ON STITCHES WITH KNITTING NEEDLES   260
    THE CONTINENTAL METHOD OF KNITTING              262
    TO CAST OFF STITCHES                            262
    CHILD’S KNITTED SWEATER                         262
    LADY’S KNITTED SWEATER                          263
    RED CROSS KNITTING                              265
        EQUIPMENT                                   265
        GENERAL DIRECTIONS                          265
        MUFFLER                                     265
        WASH CLOTH                                  267
        SLEEVELESS SWEATER                          267
        KNITTED HELMET, NO. 1                       267
        KNITTED HELMET, NO. 2                       268
        WRISTLET, NO. 1                             268
        WRISTLET, NO. 2                             268
        MEDIUM-SIZED SOCK                           268
        BED SOCK                                    270
        HOT WATER BOTTLE COVER                      270

[Illustration]

NOTE.—The garments described in this book will fit 12- to 16-inch dolls.

It is impossible to give exact measurements, because few people crochet
and knit with exactly the same “tension.”

In making garments for other than 12- to 16-inch doll it would be best
to cut a paper pattern to fit the doll, and make the garments fit the
pattern, following as far as possible the directions given in this book.

[Illustration]

IMPORTANT.—In order to learn to crochet and knit, the beginner should
follow the directions, and make the garments, in the order given in the
story part of the book.

Do not try to understand the directions before doing the work. Learn
one new thing at a time doing exactly as told. Advance step by step.

In these directions woolen yarns are used, but mercerized cotton yarns
may be used in their place with good results.




LIST OF COLORED ILLUSTRATIONS


    SEE MY NEW SWEATER                 _Frontispiece_
                                            OPPOSITE
                                              PAGE
    OFF TO SCHOOL                              40
    LET US PLAY BALL                           72
    GOING SHOPPING                            104
    BABY BLUE AND BABY PINK                   136
    OUR FRIENDS TEDDY BEAR AND AIRMAN         168
    READY FOR CHURCH                          200
    FLOWERS FOR MOTHER                        230




[Illustration: “Did you say Knit?”]




CHAPTER I

KNIT AND KNACK


“WE will teach her to knit,” declared Mary Frances’ grandmother’s
knitting needles proudly. They spoke together.

When they did not speak together they always repeated what each other
said. You see, they were twins. One was named Knit and the other was
named Knack.

“And I will teach her to crochet,” said the big crochet hook just as
proudly.

“Knitting is a much older art than crocheting,” said Knit.

“Knitting is a much older art than crocheting,” repeated Knack.

[Illustration: “We will teach him to knit.”]

“Knit!” exclaimed Crow Shay Hook. “It is not!”

[Illustration: “Knit! It is not!”]

“How can you prove that?” asked Knit.

“How can you prove that?” asked Knack.

“Easily!” answered Crow Shay. “Crocheting is making knots. Knots were
made by people before they ever thought of weaving. Knitting is a sort
of weaving, you know. Knotting is not, you know.”

“To tell the honest truth,” a new voice spoke, “I do not believe any of
you know what you are talking about; but I could tell you a story—” and
the big ball of yarn rolled over nearer the group of needles.

[Illustration: “To tell the honest truth”]

“Oh, spare us, Wooley Ball!” begged all the needles. “We don’t want to
hear any more yarns.”

“It is easy to see,” went on Wooley Ball, pretending not to notice
their impoliteness, “that for most people crocheting is more easily
learned than knitting. Therefore it seems best that Crow Shay should
begin the lessons.”

“What’s that?” The Yarn Baby suddenly sat up, her hair standing out
straight on her head. It always stood up straight and stiff when she
was excited. “You know very well, Wooley Ball, that I was chosen to
direct these lessons.”

[Illustration: “What’s that?”]

“Please excuse me?” begged Wooley Ball. “I am always so interested in
knitting and crocheting that sometimes I forget myself, I fear.”

The Yarn Baby’s hair slowly settled back into place. She smoothed and
patted it down carefully.

“It so happens that I felt that Crow Shay had best commence the
lessons,” she said.

Crow Shay glanced over at the Knitting Twins.

“Get the hook!” laughed the Knitting Needles. “We shall have lots of
fun listening to the crocheting lessons.”

“All right,” cried Wooley Ball to Crow Shay; “let’s get ready, Hookey.
I’ll chase you into the Red Cross knitting bag!” and away hopped Crow
Shay, while the big ball rolled after him. Right down into the bottom
of the big bag they landed and Crow Shay cuddled up close to Wooley
Ball.

[Illustration: Into the Red Cross knitting bag.]

“We shall have a splendid time with Miss Mary Frances, don’t you think,
Wooley Ball?” asked Crow Shay.

“Indeed we shall,” said Wooley Ball warmly. “If we begin to have the
fun the Thimble People had, we shall feel very happy.”

[Illustration: She smoothed it down carefully.]

[Illustration: “But don’t you remember?”]




CHAPTER II

AUNT MARIA STEPS IN


FOR a long time Wooley Ball and Crow Shay lay very still in the
knitting bag, hoping that Mary Frances would soon come into the room.

At length Crow Shay began to move about restlessly.

“Do be quiet,” whispered Wooley Ball softly. “If you don’t stop jumping
about, you’ll punch a hole in the bag!”

[Illustration: Wooley Ball lay very still.]

“I can’t keep still,” complained Crow Shay; “my foot’s asleep! My, how
it hurts!”

“How does it feel?” asked Wooley Ball, in sympathy.

[Illustration: Hoping Mary Frances would come.]

“Just like tiny mosquito bites all over me which scratching won’t help.”

“I guess you mean moth bites!” exclaimed Wooley Ball.

“Will you two keep still?” said the Yarn Baby, tapping upon the
knitting bag with her soft little fist. “I think that I hear footsteps.”

    “Don’t speak to me now,
       Don’t speak to me never;
     And I will be quiet
       Forever and ever!”

sang Crow Shay, poking his little round head up through the top of the
bag.

[Illustration: Poking his head up.]

“Oh, are you going to be bad?” sighed the Yarn Baby. “Get down in
there!” She pushed his head down into the bag and tied it shut.

“Now, he’s shut up,” she said, settling down beside the bag, and
smoothing her hair, which had begun to stand up.

She was just in time, too, for as she finished putting the last strand
in place the door opened, and in stepped—Mary Frances’ Aunt Maria!

[Illustration: “Will you two keep still?”]

“For the land’s sake!” she exclaimed. “For the land’s sake! So that is
where Mary Frances left her knitting bag! I’ve hunted high and low for
it. I never thought to look on the floor!”

She sat down on Mary Frances’ little rocking-chair and emptied Wooley
Ball and Crow Shay on her lap.

“Very well,” she said, “these things will do to start with. I shall
begin her lessons to-night.”

[Illustration: Wooley Ball and Crow Shay.]

Just as she put them back into the bag, she spied the Yarn Baby.

“I’ll put that silly doll in, too,” she said, tumbling the Yarn Baby
into the bag and pulling the drawing-strings tight.

Then she carried the bag downstairs and out on the porch, where Mary
Frances sat in the porch swing reading a book.

“It is high time, my dear,” she said, “that you learn to crochet and
knit. To-night I shall give you your first lesson.

“Oh, won’t that be splendid, Aunt Maria?” cried the little girl. “I do
want to learn so much!”

[Illustration: “Won’t that be splendid?”]

“It seems very strange to me that you do not know anything about such
work,” said her aunt. “Why, I made your father learn how to knit when
he was only six years old!”

Mary Frances did not tell her Aunt Maria that her father had told her
about those lessons, and how he had hated the work because, every time
he made a mistake, his aunt would whack his chubby, clumsy little
fingers with a ruler.

[Illustration: Aunt Maria.]

You see, Aunt Maria was Mary Frances’ great-aunt, and was the aunt of
her father also. Mary Frances’ grandmother, the mother of Mary Frances’
father, died when he was a little boy and his Aunt Maria had “brought
him up.”

“Mother would like to teach me,” said Mary Frances, “but——”

“Your mother was not brought up right,” her aunt snapped. “What
does she know about crocheting? She doesn’t know star stitch from
coffee-bean stitch, and as for knitting—I don’t suppose she knows plain
knitting from purling! Very queer! A very queer way to bring up a
child!”

[Illustration: “But don’t you remember?”]

“But, Aunt Maria, don’t you remember? Mother fell and hurt her arm when
she was little and couldn’t use it for such work for years,” said Mary
Frances. “Even now it hurts her arm to try to crochet. That is what I
commenced to tell you.”

[Illustration: “Even now it hurts her”]

“Oh, yes,” said Aunt Maria, “I remember now. But your arm doesn’t hurt,
and you must learn to crochet and knit, my dear niece. You are so much
like me anyway that you must learn to crochet and knit well. Then you
may grow up to be almost exactly like me! Now, I must go set my bread.
Nothing ever interferes with my program except sickness or death. You
must be like me in that, too.” And the old lady went down the path.

[Illustration: Mary Frances]

At the gate she turned. “Remember,” she called, “I’ll be ready at seven
o’clock.”

[Illustration: “Oh, he loves to crow—”]




CHAPTER III

CROW SHAY TALKS


“OH, dear,” sighed Mary Frances. “Oh, dear, how I wish there were
crocheting and knitting people like the Kitchen People and the Thimble
People—only that would be too good to be true.”

[Illustration: “Oh, dear!”]

    “Not at all,
       Not at all;
     Untie the bag
       And see us all,”

came a voice from the knitting bag which was beside Mary Frances in the
swing just where Aunt Maria had laid it. She picked it up and untied
the drawing-strings and up popped Crow Shay.

[Illustration: Up popped Crow Shay.]

The bright sunlight made him blink as he looked around.

    “Good day, good day,
       To you we say—
     Yarn Baby, Wooley Ball
       And I, Crow Shay,”

sang the little fellow, as Mary Frances lifted them out.

[Illustration: Sang the little fellow.]

“Oh, can you all talk?” she asked in delight. “Can they, Crow Shay?”

“‘Can they crochet?’” repeated Crow Shay, “‘Can they crochet?’ Why, I
don’t think they can. They can only help. Crow Shay Hooks are the only
ones who really can crochet!”

“Oh, I see,” said Mary Frances, even though she did not understand
exactly what he meant.

By this time the Yarn Baby’s hair was standing on end. She looked so
wild that Mary Frances pretended to be frightened and began to move
away.

[Illustration: “Do not be alarmed”]

“Do not be alarmed, Miss Mary Frances,” said the Yarn Baby, trying to
smooth down her hair. “My hair always stands out that way when I get
excited. I was afraid some one might overhear Crow Shay talking, and
then all our lovely plans would be spoiled. Crow Shay always talks too
much, anyhow. You might think that he was appointed to take charge of
the lessons instead of me!”

[Illustration: “Crow Shay always talks too much”]

“Oh,” said Mary Frances, “I know what you wish to do! You want to give
me secret lessons in crocheting and knitting just as the Kitchen People
gave me lessons in cooking, and the Thimble People gave me lessons in
sewing! I’ll put you all back in the bag and carry you upstairs this
minute, and I do hope that you will begin the lessons right away!”

[Illustration: “I know what you wish to do”]

[Illustration: “Hush!” warned Wooley Ball.]




CHAPTER IV

WOOLEY BALL TELLS SOME YARNS


MARY FRANCES opened the bag on the sewing table.

“Is this the whole family?” she asked as she lifted the Yarn Baby,
Wooley Ball and Crow Shay out.

[Illustration: Spoke up Crow Shay.]

    “Oh, no, indeed!
       Oh, no indeed!
     Wait till the rest of us
       You’ve see’d,”

spoke up Crow Shay.

Up flew the Yarn Baby’s hair.

[Illustration: “‘See’d,’ indeed!”]

“‘See’d,’ indeed! ‘See’d,’ indeed! Do be more polite, Crow Shay!” she
exclaimed. “Use correct grammar and give some one else a chance to
speak!”

[Illustration: “Do be more polite!”]

Then she explained to Mary Frances about the large family of Crocheting
and Knitting People who were so anxious to help her.

“Oh, I can’t wait to begin!” cried the delighted little girl. “What do
I do first?”

    “First you will a slip knot make;
     Then in your right hand me you’ll take—”

began Crow Shay.

“Now, now,” exclaimed the Yarn Baby. “There you go again!”

“Oh, he loves to crow—” said Wooley Ball, laughing.

[Illustration: “Oh, he loves to crow—”]

“You mean that I love to crochet, Wooley Ball!” Crow Shay turned toward
Wooley Ball.

“Well, I think that Wooley Ball means that you love to crochet so much
that when you get a chance, you love to crow about it!” said the Yarn
Baby. “You do not wait to give anyone else a chance to talk. Now, the
very first person to explain lessons in crocheting and knitting is
Wooley Ball.”

“Because she can tell so many yarns!” giggled Crow Shay.

[Illustration: Giggled Crow Shay.]

Wooley Ball looked up at Mary Frances with a broad smile.

[Illustration: Wooley Ball looked up.]

“Do not mind him,” she said. “If you are quite ready, we will have a
little talk about—


DIFFERENT YARNS

    There are many different weights and sizes of woolen
    yarns. We shall need to know about only a few of these.

    All yarns are made of twisted strands of thread. The
    weight depends upon the number and size of the strands
    that are twisted together.

    If two strands are twisted together, the yarn is
    two-fold.

    If three strands are twisted together, the yarn is
    three-fold.

[Illustration]

    If four strands are twisted together, the yarn is
    four-fold.

    If you are uncertain of the “fold” of the yarn you
    have, untwist a little piece and count the strands.


NAMES OF YARNS

    Germantown Zephyr or Germantown Wool. A soft woolly
    yarn very much used where warmth is needed.

    Germantown wool comes in four-fold and eight-fold
    weights. Four-fold is the weight generally used. The
    eight-fold is too thick and heavy for most purposes.

[Illustration: Hank of yarn.]

    Knitting Worsted is somewhat like Germantown wool in
    weight, but is rather harsh to the touch, because
    the threads are made of long twisted fibers of wool.
    Garments made of knitting worsted will stand hard wear
    and usage.

    Saxony Wool. A soft yarn made of light-weight strands.
    Comes in two-fold, three-fold, and four-fold weights.

    The four-fold and two-fold are the weights most used.
    Saxony wool is much used for making garments for babies.

[Illustration: Wool in balls.]

    Woolen Knitting Floss. A light-weight, loosely-twisted
    yarn. Comes in single and double threads.

    Teazle Yarn, or Teazle Wool, resembles knitting floss,
    but is rougher and harsher in finish. It is more often
    used for trimming than for making garments.

    Angora Wool is a hairy yarn used for trimming. It is
    made entirely of the soft silky hair of the Angora
    goat, or of a mixture of wool and Angora hair. It is so
    expensive that Teazle yarn is much used in its stead.
    After the trimming is made, the Teazle yarn is usually
    brushed until it is quite furry and fuzzy.

[Illustration: Needles.]

    There are many different makers of yarns. Each firm
    manufactures a variety of yarns under various fancy
    names. All manufacturers, however, make Germantown
    Wool, Knitting Worsteds, Saxony Wools, Woolen Flosses,
    and Teazle Wool.

[Illustration: Mary Frances and the wools.]

[Illustration: She only smiled.]




CHAPTER V

SPEAKING OF MOTHS


“THERE!” exclaimed Crow Shay as Wooley Ball finished. “There! Hasn’t
Wooley Ball long yarns to spin?”

[Illustration: “There!”]

Mary Frances laughed. “You little chatterbox,” she said, “I really
believe that you are jealous!”

“I certainly do love to talk,” said Crow Shay; “but I admit I can’t
tell about yarns the way Wooley Ball can.”

Here the Yarn Baby interrupted.

“If you will bring your chest of yarns, little Miss,” she said, “we
will soon see if you have all those different kinds of yarns.”

[Illustration: “Bring your chest of yarns”]

Mary Frances went to the closet, and brought the chest to the sewing
table.

As she pulled out the bright-colored yarns, some small white balls fell
on the table.

[Illustration: Small white balls.]

“Oh, goody!” exclaimed Wooley Ball. “I see that you are not going to
let the moths eat up your treasures. Moths hate camphor and moth balls.
I just love them.”

“Oh, I know about moths,” said Mary Frances. “I learned a sad lesson
about them. Once my aunt knit my doll a little——”

“Did you say Knit?” came a little voice.

“Did you say Knit?” came another little voice.

[Illustration: “Did you say Knit?”]

“Who was that?” asked Mary Frances.

“Oh, that’s only Knit and Knack, the Knitting Twins,” answered Crow
Shay.

He turned toward the table where they lay.

“You two go to sleep again!” he said. “It’s not your turn yet.”

By this time the Yarn Baby looked like a porcupine. Her hair stood out
so straight and stiff that Mary Frances was almost afraid to speak.

“He will keep on until he will have to be punished,” whispered Wooley
Ball.

“Yes,” said the Yarn Baby, “if he doesn’t stop crowing so much I will
not let him crochet.”

That seemed to scare Crow Shay terribly, and he did not utter another
sound, but listened with all his ears.

“You were speaking of moths,” Wooley Ball reminded Mary Frances.

[Illustration: “Speaking of moths”]

“Oh, yes—about the little coat which my aunt made for Angie, my doll.
I used it all winter and in the summer I folded it and put it away in
a little box. When the weather was cold again, and Angie needed it, I
took it out of the box and what do you think happened?”

“I know!” declared Wooley Ball. “I know what happened. The little coat
fell to pieces when you picked it up. The moths had bitten it all over.”

[Illustration: “The moths had bitten it all over”]

“Yes, that’s exactly what happened,” said Mary Frances. “It taught me
never to put anything made of wool away without camphor or moth balls.”

[Illustration: Neatly wound balls.]




CHAPTER VI

CROW SHAY’S RELATIVES


WOOLEY BALL and the Yarn Baby looked over the yarns that Mary Frances
had put on the sewing table.

“These are just right,” said the Yarn Baby. “You have every kind of
wool here that we shall need. Will you see that all the yarns are wound
into very, very loose balls before your next lesson?”

[Illustration: “These are just right”]

“Yes,” promised Mary Frances, “I will wind them over my hand the way
Aunt Maria does, so that the balls feel quite ‘spongey.’ I wish that
all yarns came from the factories wound in balls, though!”

[Illustration: “Yes, I will”]

“You are not the first person to wish that,” said the Yarn Baby. “Hanks
and skeins are much harder for a child to manage than balls. Now, if
you please, we will talk a few minutes about crochet hooks.”

[Illustration: WIND YARNS OVER THE HAND]

Crow Shay rolled his eyes toward the Yarn Baby, but did not say a word.

[Illustration: “Come, Crow Shay”]

“Come, Crow Shay,” said the Yarn Baby; “you may tell us about all your
little and big relatives.”

Then Crow Shay began to tell about—

[Illustration: Crow Shay began to tell.]

CROCHET HOOKS AND KNITTING NEEDLES

    Crochet hooks and knitting needles are made of bone,
    or celluloid (amber), or rubber, or wood. These are
    usually made in sizes from 0 to 15, size 0 being the
    smallest.

[Illustration: OFF TO SCHOOL

FOR DIRECTIONS FOR MAKING KNITTED ARTICLES SHOWN IN THIS ILLUSTRATION
SEE

CROCHETED SCARF—69 CROCHETED GARTERS—242 HAIR PIN BALL—107

CROCHETED TURBAN (HAT)—99 CROCHETED BOOK BAG—118]

    Crochet hooks and knitting needles are also made of
    steel. Steel crochet hooks usually come in sizes from 0
    to 14.[A] Size 0 is quite large. Size 14 is very small.
    Steel knitting needles are usually numbered from 8 to
    20. Size 8 is large. Size 20 very fine.

    Steel hooks and needles are generally used for making
    articles of cotton thread, and needles made of bone,
    celluloid, rubber or wood are generally used for wool
    work.

[Illustration: Steel hooks.]

“I will give you a gauge card to measure the sizes of crochet hooks and
knitting needles,” finished Crow Shay.

[Illustration: THIS SCALE FOR STEEL KNITTING NEEDLES ONLY

Sizes for knitting and crochet needles.]

“Oh, thank you,” said Mary Frances, helping Crow Shay take a card out
of the knitting bag. “Now I shall feel very much better acquainted with
your whole family.”

“Take good care of the picture,” said Crow Shay. “You may often want to
look at it.”[B]

[Illustration: “Dear little girl.”]




CHAPTER VII

A DISAPPOINTMENT


JUST then the gong sounded for dinner.

“What!” exclaimed the little girl. “Is it six o’clock already? Why, I
had no idea how time had flown!”

“You must have enjoyed hearing me talk,” said Crow Shay. Then, noticing
the Yarn Baby’s hair, he corrected himself.

[Illustration: He corrected himself]

“I mean, you must have enjoyed hearing _us_ talk,” he said.

Then there came footsteps on the stairs.

“Mary Frances, didn’t you hear the gong? Mother sent me to look for
you,” called the little girl’s brother Billy. “Where are you, anyway?”
he asked as he bounded up the steps.

[Illustration: “What! Dinner time already!”]

“Mercy!” exclaimed Crow Shay under his breath, as his face melted away.

Wooley Ball rolled over on her face.

The Yarn Baby fell over on her side and looked as dumb as a dumb-bell.

“I’m coming,” called Mary Frances. “I’ll be right down.”

“Oh, do not let anyone know about us,” muttered the Yarn Baby. “If you
do, we’ll be deader than sixty coffin nails.”

[Illustration: “Deader than sixty coffin nails.”]

“I’ll never tell about any of you, dear Yarn Baby,” whispered Mary
Frances, hurrying away.

She had scarcely finished her dinner before her aunt came in.

“Seven o’clock,” said the old lady, after greeting the family; “seven
o’clock is the time I said we would start our lesson, Mary Frances. Are
you nearly ready?”

Poor Mary Frances! She felt like crying when she thought of how Crow
Shay, and Wooley Ball and the Yarn Baby had been planning to give her
lessons.

[Illustration: Poor Mary Frances!]

“Are you nearly ready?” repeated Aunt Maria.

“Why, yes, Aunt Maria. I will be ready as soon as I get my knitting
bag. I carried it upstairs,” she answered.

“I’ll wait for you right here at the foot of the stairs,” said her
aunt. “Then we will go over to my house where no one will interrupt us.”

“Oh, dear,” thought Mary Frances. “I don’t want to go! I guess I shall
have to, though. It would disappoint Aunt Maria so dreadfully if I did
not.”

Mary Frances paused at the door of the room, thinking that she might
hear her new friends talking, but there wasn’t a sound.

“Let me see—what shall I take?” she thought. “I don’t dare take the
Yarn Baby. Aunt Maria would think it foolish. I do not want to take
Wooley Ball for fear Aunt Maria will use her. I can take Crow Shay,
though. He might enjoy the lesson!”

She selected some Germantown zephyr and put it into her knitting bag;
then she carefully laid Crow Shay in.

“You will help me a lot,” she said as she drew up the strings.

[Illustration: “You will help a lot”]

Her aunt was waiting for her. She ran to kiss her mother good-bye, then
hurried off with the old lady.

[Illustration: She drew up the strings]

[Illustration: “Oh, did she get off?”]




CHAPTER VIII

A DOLL’S NECKLACE


“LET me see what you have in your bag, child,” said Aunt Maria, as soon
as they were seated in the big old-fashioned parlor of the old lady’s
house.

Mary Frances opened the bag. To her surprise Crow Shay winked an eye at
her, but his face melted away before Aunt Maria saw it.

[Illustration: Winked an eye at her.]

She caught up the crochet hook, however, and examined it.

“A very good crochet hook,” she said. “Just right to learn with. About
a number 5, I judge,” looking at it carefully.

She laid it down on the table, and took up Mary Frances’ ball of yarn,
and showed her how.

[Illustration: Took up the ball of yarn.]


TO MAKE CHAIN STITCH

[Illustration: Chain Stitch]

    Material: Germantown wool.
    Bone crochet needle No. 5.

    CUT[C] 1

    Hold crochet hook and yarn in positions shown in this
    picture.

    CUT 2

    Pointing the hook away from you, turn it completely
    around, bringing a loop on the needle.

    CUT 3

    With thumb and second finger of left hand take hold of
    the crossed threads. Now point the hook under the yarn,
    and catch it on the hook. This is called “wrapping” the
    yarn.

    CUT 4

    Pull a loop through the loop which was on the needle.

    CUT 5

    Pull the loop closer up on the hook, and

    CUT 6

    Get ready to take another stitch.

    CUT 7

    Wrap, and draw another loop through the loop on the
    needle.

    CUT 8

    Keep on drawing loops through the stitches in this way
    until you have made quite a long row of chain stitches.

[Illustration: Draw loop through]

[Illustration: PLATE 1—MOTION PICTURES SHOWING HOW TO MAKE CHAIN STITCH

SEE DESCRIPTION, PAGE 48]

This time Mary Frances thought Crow Shay grinned at her. Then his face
melted away, leaving nothing but the upturned line of his grin.

[Illustration: His face melted away.]

“My,” thought the little girl, “if he keeps on, I shall be sure to
laugh;” but she paid strict attention to what her aunt told her.

“To begin with,” said Aunt Maria, “everybody who learns to crochet must
learn how to make chain stitch. In order to learn how to make chain
stitch you must do just as I have already shown you.”

Mary Frances tried again and again and was able at length to make chain
stitch very well. She knew that Crow Shay helped her.

“Even though I seldom played with dolls when I was young,” said her
aunt, “I believe that I can show you how to make some pretty necklaces
for dolls by using this stitch. I used to make them and give them to my
friends for their dolls.”

“Oh, how, Aunt Maria?” cried Mary Frances, delighted with the thought.
“I’d just love to make one for Mary Marie!”

[Illustration: “Oh, how, Aunt Maria?”]

“Perhaps in this way,” said her aunt, giving her directions for making—

[Illustration]

[Illustration: Six glass beads.]

[Illustration: A Doll’s Necklace.]

[Illustration: PLATE 2—MOTION PICTURES SHOWING HOW TO MAKE SINGLE
CROCHET

SEE DESCRIPTION, PAGE 51]


DOLL’S CROCHETED NECKLACE

    Material: Pink or light blue or yellow Germantown
    zephyr. Six glass beads with large stringing holes.

    Needle: Bone crochet hook No. 5.

    Directions: Leaving an end of about 3 inches, make a
    length of about 60 chain stitches.

    When fastening off the work, leave a 3-inch end of yarn.

    Thread a long-eyed needle with the end of yarn hanging
    from one end of necklace, and string three beads upon
    it. Fasten end of yarn securely into the end chain
    stitch. Do the same to the other end of the necklace.

    Tie the two ends of the necklace together around doll’s
    neck.

“Oh, won’t that be lovely for Mary Marie!” exclaimed Mary Frances. “I
shall make one for her to-morrow. Thank you, Aunt Maria.”

“Probably you will,” said her aunt. “You certainly do learn
quickly—just like me. You certainly are very much like me. I always
learned such things quickly.”

[Illustration: “You learn quickly.”]

“Now,” she continued after a little pause, “now, watch me, and learn
how—


TO MAKE SINGLE CROCHET

    Material: Germantown wool.
    Bone crochet hook No. 5.

    Make a row of 15 chain stitches.

    CUT 1—Put the hook through the second chain stitch from
    the needle. (That is, skip one chain stitch.)

    CUT 2—Draw a loop through the chain stitch, and wrap
    the yarn over the hook, and

    CUT 3—Pull a loop through the two loops on the needle.

    CUT 4—Keep on working in this way until you have made a
    row of single crochet stitches.

[Illustration: “Oh, wont that be lovely!”]

[Illustration]

_To Turn the Work_

    In making the second row (on top of the first row) make
    1 chain stitch to use in turning; that is, make 1 chain
    stitch, and holding the needle still in the right hand,
    turn the work over to the wrong side so that the row
    just made points in the same direction as the needle.
    It is always necessary to use chain stitches in turning
    crochet work—to keep the edges even.

    Put the hook through under both threads at the top of
    the next stitch (See “A” in the picture) and make a
    single crochet stitch. Continue to make single crochet
    stitches across the row.

[Illustration: Double Crow Shay]


TO MAKE DOUBLE CROCHET

    Material: Germantown wool.
    Bone crochet hook No. 5.

    Make a row of 15 chain stitches.

    Wrap the yarn over the needle, and put hook through the
    third chain stitch from the needle. (That is, skip 2
    chain stitches.)

    Draw a loop through the chain stitch, and wrap yarn
    over hook.

    Pull a loop through 2 of the loops on the needle.

[Illustration: Crochet Cotton.]

[Illustration: DOUBLE CROCHET]

    Wrap again and pull a loop through the 2 loops on the
    needle. Finish the row; turn the work; and make another
    row of double crochet stitches.


TO MAKE SLIP STITCH

    Make 15 chain stitches. Skip one chain. Put the hook
    through the next chain stitch; wrap yarn over needle,
    and draw it through both loops on the needle. Continue
    to make slip stitches to end of chain. Turn the work,
    and make a second row.

[Illustration: He was a wonderful help.]

As you may guess, Mary Frances had very little trouble in making these
stitches, for Crow Shay was a wonderful help.

[Illustration: She only smiled.]

“You are certainly quick at learning these stitches, my dear niece,”
said her aunt. “I think—I really think that you have learned them even
more quickly than I did.”

“I wonder what Aunt Maria would say if she knew about Crow Shay,”
thought Mary Frances; but she only smiled, and kept on making single
crochet stitches.

“That is all for to-night’s lesson,” said her aunt. “It is nearly your
bedtime. I will walk home with you.”

[Illustration: Chain stitch]

[Illustration: Took up the ball of yarn.]




CHAPTER IX

A TELEGRAM


THE minute Mary Frances saw her mother she knew that something was
wrong, for she looked so white and worried. In her hand was a yellow
envelope.

“A telegram!” exclaimed Mary Frances. “Mother dear, is—is it—about
father?”

“Oh, Mary Frances,” said her mother. “I am so thankful to see you and
Aunt Maria! I was just looking for Billy to send word for you to come.”

“Do sit down, child,” said Aunt Maria, “and tell us all about it. Mary
Frances, bring your mother a glass of water, and here—here is my bottle
of smelling salts.”

[Illustration: So white and worried]

[Illustration: “A telegram!”]

Mary Frances flew to bring the water.

Then Aunt Maria read the telegram.

[Illustration: Aunt Maria read it.]

“Your father has been hurt in a railroad accident, my dear,” she said.
“Your mother and I must start to him immediately. I will go pack my
bag. You can help your mother get ready. I shall be back in a very
short time. Billy will carry our bags to the train. Your mother is
feeling better, or I would not leave you. Good-bye.”

And without any more ado the old lady was gone.

Mary Frances put her arms around her mother’s neck.

“Dear little girl,” said her mother. “You will be brave and womanly, I
know.”

[Illustration: “Dear little girl”]

“Yes, mother, I will!” said Mary Frances. “I will help you in every way
I can. That is the best way of helping father. Come on upstairs, dear,
and let me help you get ready to go to him. Do you feel able to go?”

“It is the very thing I want to do most of all. I am glad that Aunt
Maria is going with me, though. I know I shall find her a wonderful
help.”

Mary Frances packed her mother’s suitcase, and fastened her dress, and
buttoned her shoes, and put her hat and veil on. “Just as if I were
your little girl,” said her mother. “What a darling comfort you are, my
dear!”

Billy and Mary Frances went to the station with their mother and aunt.
Billy carried their luggage and bought their tickets. “No grown man
could have done better,” said his mother; and even Aunt Maria praised
him.

[Illustration: Billy.]

“Now, children,” said their mother, giving them their last directions,
“Katie will be home about ten o’clock. You had better wait up for her.
Poor, faithful soul, she will be as grieved as any of us about the sad
news.”

[Illustration: “Now, children.”]

“But it isn’t such sad news as it might be, mother,” said Billy.
“Father will soon be well, we hope.”

“With the kind of nursing which I—I mean we—will give him,” said Aunt
Maria, “I expect he will be about quite soon.”

That speech cheered everybody, and the children felt so hopeful that
they were nearly happy as the train pulled out of the station.

The house seemed pretty empty and lonesome when they went in.

“Let’s play checkers,” said Billy; and they forgot a little of their
troubles in the game.

It was not long before they heard footsteps on the porch. Then the bell
rang.

“Oh, Billy, aren’t you afraid to go to the door?” whispered Mary
Frances.

“Afraid!” exclaimed Billy. “What’s there to be scared of? You know it’s
Katie, most likely.”

But Mary Frances noticed that he kept the toe of his shoe against the
door, and opened it only a little way.

“Is it you, Katie?” he asked.

“It sure is,” answered Katie. “That is, it’s meself if I know meself.”

[Illustration: “It sure is.”]

“Oh, come in, come on in, Katie,” cried Mary Frances; and with tears
running down her cheeks, she told Katie the whole story.

[Illustration: “Come in Katie.”]

“Poor little girl!” said Katie, holding her in her arms. “Don’t you
worry. We’ll probably hear good news from your mother in the morning.
Come now, let’s all go to bed.”

[Illustration: Another telegram]

Katie was right. The morning brought another telegram. It said:

    _Father is not dangerously hurt. Will write about
    everything._

                                          _Mother._

“Oh, Katie! Oh, Billy!” cried Mary Frances. “I am the thankfulest of
all thankful children in the world, I guess. I feel happy enough to
kiss a crow!”

“Well, I’m thankful enough to play a game of ball,” said Billy,
starting off.



“And I’m thankful enough—to clean house,” said Katie.

Mary Frances offered to help her, but Katie said, “Oh, you just keep to
your own knitting, little girl. If I need you I’ll call upon you, thank
you.”

“The very thing!” thought Mary Frances and went upstairs.

[Illustration: “The very thing.”]

[Illustration: “You work pretty well.”]




CHAPTER X

MAKING PLANS


CROW SHAY was peeping out of the knitting bag.

[Illustration: Peeping out.] “I told them all about it,” said he. “I
told all about how well you learned your stitches.”

“If you hadn’t helped me,” Mary Frances said; “if I hadn’t had such a
kind, helpful friend, I never would have done as well as I did.”

    “Not for to-day,
       But every day,
     I’ll be your little friend,
       Crow Shay,”

promised the little fellow, again breaking into rhyme.

“So will all of us,” said the Yarn Baby.

“So will all of us.”

“Isn’t that lovely!” Mary Frances exclaimed. “Now that Aunt Maria is
away——”

“Oh, did she get off?” asked Wooley Ball.

[Illustration: “Oh, did she get off?”]

“Yes; she’s off,” said Crow Shay. “She’s off—and she’s awful!”

[Illustration: “She’s off—and she’s awful!”]

“Oh, for shame!” cried Mary Frances.

“I meant to teach you the stitches myself,” muttered Crow Shay. “That’s
why I said she was awful.”

“You must not speak in that way of any of my friends,” said Mary
Frances. “Aunt Maria is very good to me. She even told me how to make a
necklace for my doll.”

“Is that all she told you how to make for your doll?” asked the Yarn
Baby, sitting up suddenly.

“Why, yes; you see I do not know how to make many different kinds of
stitches yet,” said Mary Frances.

“She knows how to make chain stitch, slip stitch, single crochet and
double crochet,” said Crow Shay.

“Well, if you know that much,” went on the Yarn Baby, “we can teach you
how to make lots of things for your doll, if you will just follow our
directions.”

“Won’t that be splendid!” Mary Frances was delighted. “I can begin
right away,” she said.

“Mary Marie needs so many things,” she went on. “I do wish that the
child had all the nice warm things she needs.”

“How large is she?” asked the Yarn Baby.

[Illustration: “How large is she?”]

“Not quite sixteen inches tall,” replied Mary Frances. “I would bring
her in from the playroom, but I want to surprise her if I make anything
for her.”

“Of course,” said Wooley Ball. “We understand that.”

“Yes,” said the Yarn Baby, “and we will make everything just the right
size for her. How would you like to make her a scarf to wear around her
neck when it is cold?”

“Why—could I make a scarf with just the few kinds of stitches that I
know how to make?” asked Mary Frances in surprise.

[Illustration: A scarf.]

“Indeed you could, and indeed you can,” laughed Wooley Ball. “It is
splendid to think of your having so many beautiful yarns,” she added.

“Yes,” said Mary Frances, “my grandma sent me all she had. She kept the
yarns which were left over from her work for years. Some of them are
lovely. I meant to have them all wound into balls for this lesson, but
I haven’t had time to do it.”

She opened the little chest, and you can imagine her surprise when she
saw only neatly wound balls, instead of loose odds and ends and hanks
and skeins of yarn.

[Illustration: Neatly wound balls.]

“Why, who in the wide world did this?” she exclaimed.

    “It makes me sigh
     To say, ‘Not I,’”

sang Crow Shay.

[Illustration: Sang Crow Shay]

“I am afraid it would make you die not to say anything,” said Wooley
Ball.

    “Oh, Wooley Ball
       Knows best of all
     How to make yarns
       Into a ball,”

sang Crow Shay, laughing.

“How did you ever do it. Wooley Ball?” asked Mary Frances. “I do thank
you so much.”

“Wooley Ball is in charge of all the yarns,” the Yarn Baby explained.
“They all obey her.”

“When I say,

    ‘All, all
    Go into a ball,’

they wind themselves,” said Wooley Ball.

[Illustration: “All, all go into a ball”]

“Did you ever go to a ball?” asked Crow Shay. “I have. I’ve gone to a
ball, and I’ve used it all up. Oh, I am a grand ball player!”

“You are too silly for words sometimes,” said the Yarn Baby. “Now you
will soon have a chance to show how you play ball!”

[Illustration: “You are too silly.”]

[Illustration: Mary Marie.]




CHAPTER XI

A ROSE SCARF


“WHAT color would you like to use for Mary Marie’s scarf, little Miss?”
asked the Yarn Baby.

“I think this is pretty,” answered Mary Frances, lifting a ball of
rose-colored Germantown zephyr.

    “Mary Marie arose, arose,
     ‘A rose,’ she cried, ‘A rose
     Scarf, I propose,’”

said Crow Shay.

[Illustration: “Mary Marie arose, arose”]

[Illustration: “Will you keep still!”]

“Will you keep still!” screamed the Yarn Baby, her hair standing out
in all directions. At least she tried to scream, but her voice sounded
like a zephyr wind. “You are so full of mischief, I don’t see how you
will do any work to-day,” she added.

    “I love to work,
     I never shirk,
     Nor do I jerk my work
     When I do work,”

sang Crow Shay.

[Illustration: Sang Crow Shay.]

[Illustration]

“You generally do work pretty well,” admitted the Yarn Baby, “but you
are pretty slow sometimes.”

[Illustration: “You work pretty well.”] “We haven’t been very fast
about getting those directions,” said Crow Shay.

The Yarn Baby took the hint and gave the directions for—


    DOLL’S CROCHETED SCARF

    (See picture opposite page 40—color plate)

    Material: Rose color, or blue four-fold Germantown zephyr.
    Gray Germantown zephyr for trimming.
    Bone crochet hook No. 5.

    Directions:

    1. With the rose or blue wool, make 7 chain stitches.
    Turn the work.

    2. Skip 1 chain stitch. Make 6 single crochet stitches
    into the 6 chain stitches. (See picture of single
    crochet stitch, opposite page 51.)

    3. Make 1 chain stitch to use in turning for the next
    row of stitches; that is, after having the chain stitch
    on the needle, turn the work over, and work on the
    other side.

    4. Make 62 rows of single crochet stitches, putting the
    crochet hook through the 2 threads or loops at the top
    of each stitch of the row below.

    5. Break off the yarn, and fasten the end by making a
    chain stitch and pulling the yarn all the way through
    the chain stitch.

[Illustration: Fringe]

[Illustration: Dolly’s Scarf.]

[Illustration: HOW TO MAKE FRINGE]


    _To Make Fringe_

    (See picture on page 70)

    1. Cut 2 strands of gray wool, making each 3 inches
    long. Lay them together, side by side.

    2. Put hook through the first stitch on one end of
    the scarf. Catch the 2 strands of gray yarn in the
    middle. Pull part way through the stitch.

    3. Throw the 4 ends of wool over the hook and pull them
    all the way through the loop on the needle.

    4. Take hold of the 4 ends of gray wool with the finger
    and thumb of your right hand, holding scarf between
    first finger and thumb of left hand with thumb close to
    the loop of the fringe. Pull gray yarn until the loop
    is tight.

    Always pull the fringe through from the same side of
    the work.

    5. Continue making fringe all across the two ends of
    the scarf.

Mary Frances worked hard, and Crow Shay helped with all his might, but
the little girl’s fingers seemed very awkward.

“Little Miss, you are doing nicely, but you pull the yarn too tight,”
said the Yarn Baby, who was watching her work most carefully.

[Illustration: “You pull the yarn too tight.”]

Mary Frances noticed how smooth her hair looked. She knew the Yarn Baby
was not displeased.

“I know I hold my work tight,” she said. “My fingers just won’t let go
of the yarn.”

“If you are inclined to make your stitches too tight, use a larger
crochet hook,” said the Yarn Baby.

[Illustration: Crow Shay looked frightened]

Crow Shay looked so frightened that Mary Frances wanted to laugh; but
she was afraid that if she did it would hurt his feelings, so she only
said, “I think that I can manage better soon.”

“If your work curls up when you have finished,” said the Yarn Baby,
“lay it under a damp cloth or a damp towel over night. When it is dry
it will be quite smooth.”

“Dampness always takes the curl out of my hair,” laughed Mary Frances,
working away.

The Crochet People helped whenever she made a mistake, and the Yarn
Baby repeated the directions when she asked about them. She had not
quite finished the scarf when Katie called her to lunch.

[Illustration: “Under a damp cloth”]

[Illustration: Katie called her to lunch.]

[Illustration: LET US PLAY BALL

FOR DIRECTIONS FOR MAKING KNITTED ARTICLES SHOWN IN THIS ILLUSTRATION
SEE

CROCHETED SHAWL—75 KNITTED SHAWL—171

KNITTED SPORTS SWEATER—201 CROCHETED SPORTS HAT—240]




CHAPTER XII

MARY MARIE’S SHAWL


AFTER helping Katie with the lunch dishes, Mary Frances ran upstairs
again.

    “How glad we are!
       How glad we are!
     We heard you coming
       From afar!”

sang Crow Shay as she entered the room.

“We were afraid that you might not come again to-day,” said the Yarn
Baby.

“Not come!” exclaimed Mary Frances. “Why, it would be punishment for me
not to have these lovely lessons.”

[Illustration: “How glad we are!”]

[Illustration: “Not come!”]

Picking up Crow Shay, she finished putting the fringe on the scarf.

“Isn’t it lovely!” she cried. “I want you all to see how sweet Mary
Marie looks in it.”

    “Oh, let her nap,
       Please let her nap,
     Until you make—
       A little cap!”

said Crow Shay.

“A cap?” asked the little girl. “Why, Crow Shay, do you think I can
ever make her a cap?”

“Yes, indeed,” answered the Yarn Baby. “We have planned that for a
lesson to come soon.”

“And we do not want to see your Polly—I mean your dolly—until you have
the set made; that is, a cap and scarf. Then you can show us how she
looks in them,” added Crow Shay.

“Oh, all right,” said Mary Frances, “that will be a much delightfuller
surprise for Mary Marie, anyhow. I will work hard, and try to make the
cap soon.”

[Illustration: “Oh, let her nap.”]

[Illustration: “Yes, indeed.”]

“Before doing that, you need a little more practice in plain work,”
said the Yarn Baby; “so how would you like to make a pretty little
shawl for your doll?”

“That is exactly what she has needed this very long while,” declared
Mary Frances.

“That’s good,” said the Yarn Baby. “Wooley Ball, what yarn have you
planned for us to use for the shawl?” she asked.

“Two shades of light blue knitting floss,” answered Wooley Ball
proudly. “The floss will make such a pretty, soft shawl.”

“Are you ready to begin?” asked the Yarn Baby as Mary Frances picked up
the lighter blue floss and Crow Shay.

“Yes,” replied Mary Frances, “all ready.” But she wondered whether Crow
Shay were not too coarse a hook to use for the floss.

“Now,” said the Yarn Baby, “you will hear about the way to make a—

[Illustration: “That’s good.”]


DOLL’S CROCHETED SHAWL

(See picture opposite page 72—color plate)

    Be sure to make the Doll’s Scarf, page 69, before
    attempting this work.

[Illustration: “Pink and white.”]


    Material: Light blue (double) wool floss. Deeper shade
    of blue wool floss for trimming.

    Bone crochet hook No. 3.

    Directions:

    1. Make 23 chain stitches with light blue floss.

    2. Skip 1 chain stitch. Make 22 single crochet stitches.

    3. Make 1 chain stitch to use in turning.

    4. Make 4 rows of light blue floss, putting hook
    through the 2 loops at the top of each stitch in the
    row below. Break off the lighter floss and join the end
    with the deeper blue floss.

_To Join Ends of Yarn in Crocheting_

    (_a_) Tie ends of yarn together. See picture below.

    (_b_) When the work is finished, thread the ends of
    yarn into a long-eyed “crewel” or darning needle, and
    run the ends back into the work.

    5. Make 2 rows of the deeper blue floss.

[Illustration: Use Crow Shay]

[Illustration: Run the ends into the work.]


    6. Make 50 rows of light blue floss.

    7. Make 2 rows of deeper blue floss.

    8. Make 4 rows of light blue floss.

    9. Break off floss and fasten end securely.

    10. Trim shawl with fringe.

    In Making the Fringe: Cut 4 strands of floss each 3
    inches long. Draw strands through stitches in the same
    way as in making the fringe on Doll’s Scarf.

“Oh, how I wish I could work faster,” thought Mary Frances, starting
to work. “I do not believe Crow Shay is the right size for this work
anyhow.”

“I am not,” said Crow Shay, as though reading her thoughts. “I am too
large!”

“Oh!” exclaimed Mary Frances. “Oh!”

    “Oh, never mind,
       I’ve had my turn;
     I commenced
       To help you learn,”

sang Crow Shay generously.

“And aren’t you going to help me any more?” asked Mary Frances.

[Illustration: “I am too large!”]

[Illustration: “Aren’t you going to help me?”]

    “Oh, do not sigh,
       And do not cry;
     Some one will help you
       Better than I,”

the little fellow sang again.

“Some one better than you!” exclaimed Mary Frances. “Why, all of you
just suit me!”

    “Not if you knew,
       Not if you knew,
     Our fairy teacher,
       Fairly Flew,”

went on Crow Shay.

“Fairly Flew!” called the Yarn Baby.

“Tinkle! tinkle! tinkle!” came the silvery sound of clicking knitting
needles from Mary Frances’ little chest.

“Did some one call me?” asked a still more silvery voice.

“Yes,” answered the Yarn Baby, “a dear little girl who is trying to
learn how to crochet and knit needs you. She has worked so patiently
that she deserves your help.”

[Illustration: “Fairly Flew!”]

[Illustration: “Better than you!”]




CHAPTER XIII

FAIRLY FLEW FLIES IN


NO sooner had the Yarn Baby finished speaking than out of the chest
there flew a fairy!

She was so dainty and beautiful that Mary Frances felt that she would
never dare to touch her.

Her dress was made of some silvery cobwebby stuff and she wore a golden
cap.

“My name is Fairly Flew,” she said, flying over on the table near to
Mary Frances. “I love to help people who try to learn. I am the teacher
of the Crocheting and Knitting People. If I lend you one of my magic
needles, your work will go so fast that you will say that the needle
fairly flew. That is how I came to be called Fairly Flew.”

[Illustration: Never dare touch her.]

[Illustration: Yarn Baby finished.]

“Oh!” whispered Mary Frances, “another wonderful helper from Fairyland!”

“Yes,” laughed the silvery voice of Fairly Flew. “Ready to help, always
ready to help those who try, try, try again. How can I help you?”

“If you please—” began the little girl. “If you please—” but she could
seem to get no further.

Here the Yarn Baby spoke. All the Crocheting and Knitting People had
risen when Fairly Flew arrived. Now, to Mary Frances’ astonishment, the
Yarn Baby, who had always been the limpest of dolls, picked up Mary
Marie’s little rocking-chair which was on the sewing table and placed
it near the fairy.

[Illustration: “Take a seat.”]

“Please take a seat,” she said, “for we need help, dear Fairly Flew, in
making the doll’s shawl.”

“Oh, is that so?” laughed Fairly Flew. Then she put her hand down into
her cobwebby pocket and pulled out a silver crochet hook with a handle
only about an inch long.

She handed the crochet hook to Mary Frances.

“Take hold of its head and its heel, and pull,” she said.

[Illustration: “Always ready to help.”]

Mary Frances was almost afraid to pull, but she was very much pleased
to find that when she did, the crochet hook became nearly as long as
Crow Shay.

“Finish your work with my needle,” directed Fairly Flew.

Mary Frances was astonished at what happened. No sooner did she start
to make a row of stitches than the magic crochet needle darted ahead of
her fingers and finished the row in a twinkle of an eye.

In about sixty twinkles the little shawl was finished.

“Oh,” gasped Mary Frances, “Oh, isn’t it wonderful?” and she held it up
for all to admire.

“Put it away, my dear,” said Fairly Flew. “I do not have very long to
stay. A few hours a day is all the time I have for any mortal. So let
us get everything done that we can.”

[Illustration: “Finish with my needle”]

[Illustration: “Isn’t it wonderful?”]

[Illustration: Her hair began to stand on end.]




CHAPTER XIV

A LITTLE PETTICOAT


“WHAT comes next?” Fairly Flew asked the Yarn Baby.

“Next,” answered the Yarn Baby, “we planned to show the little Miss how
to make another scarf for Mary Marie.”

[Illustration: “She hasn’t two necks.”]

“Mary Marie hasn’t two necks,” whispered Crow Shay.

[Illustration: “Hush!” warned Wooley Ball.]

“Hush!” warned Wooley Ball as she noticed the Yarn Baby’s hair begin to
rise. “You will get into trouble if you don’t!”

“There will be caps or hats made to match the little scarfs,” went on
the Yarn Baby, turning to Mary Frances. “You will know how to make this
scarf as soon as you hear the directions:


DOLL’S CROCHETED WOOL FLOSS SCARF

(See picture opposite page 104—color plate)

    Be sure to make Doll’s Shawl, page 75, before
    attempting to make this scarf.

    Material: Old rose wool floss. Gray floss for trimming.

    Bone crochet hook No. 3

    Directions:

    1. With rose floss make 13 chain stitches.

    2. Skip 1 chain stitch, and make 12 single crochet
    stitches.

    3. Make 1 chain stitch to use in turning.

    4. Putting hook through the 2 loops at the top of
    stitches just made, make 4 rows of the old rose floss.

    5. Make 2 rows of the gray floss.

    6. Make 2 rows of the old rose floss.

    7. Make 2 rows of gray floss.

    8. Make 90 rows of the old rose floss.

    9. Make 2 rows of the gray floss.

    10. Make 2 rows of the rose floss.

    11. Make 2 rows of the gray floss.

[Illustration: Mary Marie.]

[Illustration: Old rose; gray floss]

    12. Make 4 rows of the rose floss. Break off yarn and
    fasten. Trim ends of scarf with fringe.

    Make the fringe exactly like fringe on ends of Doll’s
    Scarf, page 70.

Mary Frances found the old rose and gray flosses, and set about making
the scarf. It was very little trouble, for the magic needle darted
ahead just as in making the shawl, and very soon the little scarf was
finished.

“Isn’t it pretty?” cried Mary Frances. “How happy I shall be to make
the caps or hats. Do they come next?”

[Illustration: “No, not yet.”]

“No,” answered the Yarn Baby, “not yet.”

“I will tell you why,” said Fairly Flew. “It is because they would be
too difficult for you to make now. You must learn to make the simplest
things first. Then you will climb right up in the work.”

“She hasn’t made anything in double crochet stitch,” Crow Shay
whispered to Wooley Ball.

“I know,” whispered Wooley Ball. “Wouldn’t it be nice if she could make
her dolly a warm petticoat with double crochet stitch?”

[Illustration: Crow Shay whispered.]

[Illustration: “I wish I had one.”]

“Indeed it would,” Crow Shay whispered again. “I often wish I had one.”

“Had what?” asked Wooley Ball.

“A petticoat, of course,” Crow Shay answered.

“That is just what comes next,” said the Yarn Baby, overhearing, “and I
will give the directions at once.”

[Illustration: DOLL’S PETTICOAT]

[Illustration: “Just what comes next.”]

[Illustration: READY FOR BREAKFAST.]


DOLL’S CROCHETED PETTICOAT

(See pictures on pages 86 and 87)

    Made by working round and round from top downward.

    Material: White wool floss.

    Bone crochet hook No. 2.

    Directions:

    1. Make 48 chain stitches.

    2. Join the last chain stitch to the first chain stitch
    with a slip stitch. (See picture below—A.)

[Illustration: Crocheted petticoat.]

[Illustration: A]

[Illustration: B]

    3. Make 3 chain stitches.

    4. Put 1 double crochet stitch (see page 53) into each
    chain stitch. Join the last double crochet stitch with
    the top of the 3 chain stitches (see direction number
    3, above) with a slip stitch. This makes the first row
    of stitches. (See picture above—B.)

    5. Second row: Make 3 chain stitches, and make 1 double
    crochet in each stitch of first row putting hook under
    both threads. Join, as in first row.

[Illustration: White wool floss.]


_How to “Increase” in Crocheting_

    6. Third row: Make in same way as second row, but
    increase, or widen, the petticoat by putting 2 double
    crochet stitches in every sixth stitch.

    7. Fourth row: Like third row.

    8. Fifth row: Like third row.

    9. Sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth and eleventh
    rows: Like second row—that is, with no widening or
    increasing.

    10. Twelfth and last row: “Increase,” by putting 2
    double crochet stitches in every sixth stitch.

    Trim bottom of petticoat with scallops.


_To Make the Scallops_

    1. Put 1 single crochet stitch in the first double
    crochet stitch made on the tenth row.

    2. Make 2 chain stitches.

    3. Put 3 double crochet stitches in the same stitch
    where the 1 single crochet stitch was put.

    4. Skip 2 double crochet stitches in the last row of
    double crochet stitches of the petticoat. Put 1 single
    crochet into the third stitch.

[Illustration: Crow Shay looks on.]

[Illustration: Scallops.]

    5. Make 2 chain stitches.

    6. Put 3 double crochet stitches into the same stitch
    as the single crochet.

    Continue in same way until scallops are made all around
    the petticoat.

    Fasten the petticoat at waist with a runner.


_To Make the Runner_

[Illustration]

    1. Cut a piece of floss about 1½ yards long.

    2. Fold it in the middle, and with the doubled floss,
    make a long chain of chain stitches.

    3. Putting the crochet hook through the stitches at the
    top of the petticoat, pull the runner through. (See
    picture above.)

[Illustration: “How lovely and warm!”]

“How lovely and warm Mary Marie will be!” exclaimed Mary Frances as
she finished the little petticoat with the help of Fairly Flew’s magic
needle.

“Do not let her wear that in summer,” said the Yarn Baby.

[Illustration: “Do not wear it in summer.”]

    “If you do she’ll surely roast
     And be eaten up for toast,”

added Crow Shay. Then he looked around to see if anyone would chide him
for speaking.

[Illustration: He looked around.]

Just as he expected, the Yarn Baby’s hair began to stand up on end;
but Fairly Flew only laughed and said, “Oh, now, Yarn Baby, don’t get
ruffled. Let him make a little fun for us all.”

The Yarn Baby’s hair settled down smoothly in place, and Crow Shay did
look as though he would like to crow for sure, but he was very polite
and kept quiet.

[Illustration: Her hair began to stand on end.]

[Illustration: “You surely will surprise them.”]




CHAPTER XV

MARY MARIE’S CAP


“WHAT now?” asked Fairly Flew.

“Next,” said the Yarn Baby, “comes what the little Miss has been
wanting so much—


DOLL’S CROCHETED TOQUE OR CAP

(See pictures opposite page 104—color plate)

    Material: Old rose (double) wool floss. Gray floss to
    be used in making pom-poms.

    Bone crochet hook No. 2.

    Directions:

    1. Make 50 chain stitches. Join the last chain stitch
    to the first chain stitch with a slip stitch.

    2. Make 50 single crochet stitches and work around for
    20 rows. (See figure A on page 94.)

[Illustration: “What now?”]

[Illustration: Make a doll’s toque or cap.]

[Illustration: “Look at this.”]

[Illustration: DOLL’S CROCHETED TOQUE OR CAP

See color plate opposite page 104]

[Illustration: “Oh my! Oh my!”]

    3. Make 2 slip stitches. Then turn, and work on the
    wrong side.

    4. Make 50 single crochets for 25 rows. Fasten the end
    of the floss.

    5. Thread a zephyr needle or a darning needle with the
    floss. Lay the chain-stitched edge together like the
    top of a stocking laid flat, and sew or overhand it
    together from a to b to form top of cap. (See figure A
    on page 94).

    6. Fold up on outside of cap, about 12 rows of the
    single crochet stitches last made. Fold up about 13
    more rows. This roll forms the part around the head of
    the doll.

    7. Bring points _a_ and _b_ down to meet the roll,
    and pin in place. Fasten points in place by sewing on
    pom-poms for trimming.


_To Make Pompons_

    1. Cut 2 cardboard circles, making them measure 3
    inches across.

    2. Cut out a circular hole in the center of each,
    making it ½ inch across.

    3. Cut off 1 piece of old rose and 1 piece of gray
    floss, making each about 3 yards long. Put the ends
    together, side by side.

    4. Holding the 2 cardboard circles together, thread
    the gray and rose floss into the center hole, over the
    edges, into the center, over the edges, doing this over
    and over again until the entire length of floss is used.

    5. Put one leg of a pair of scissors between the 2
    cardboard edges of the circles, and cut the floss apart.

[Illustration: Wind with floss.]

[Illustration: Make of cardboard.]

    6. Put a short double thread of floss between the 2
    cardboard circles and tie the ends of the double thread
    firmly together.

    7. Tear off the cardboard, and carefully clip the
    surface of the pompon even.

“Now, may I show you how Mary Marie looks in her cap and scarf?” asked
Mary Frances, finishing off the pretty little toque in a short time.

[Illustration: “Indeed you may.”]

“Indeed you may!” Fairly Flew replied, and Mary Frances ran to get her.

Soon she had the proud dolly dressed, and held her up for all to see.

    “Wintry weather,
       Blowsy gale,
     Will never turn
       Your dolly pale.

     She will go out
       Without a care,
     Because her scarf
       And cap she’ll wear,”

sang Crow Shay.

[Illustration: Tie between two cardboards.]

“She is to have another cap or a hat to match the first scarf that you
made,” said the Yarn Baby. “She can wear that set to school—does Mary
Marie go to school?” she asked.

[Illustration: “Does she go to school?”]

“Oh, yes,” said Mary Frances; “to kindergarten.”

[Illustration: “Oh yes, to kindergarten.”]

“Then we must hasten to get the little hat made!” Fairly Flew
exclaimed.

[Illustration: “I’ll give directions.”]




CHAPTER XVI

MARY MARIE’S TURBAN


“PLEASE let us hear the new directions, Yarn Baby,” Fairly Flew said.

And then the Yarn Baby began:


DOLL’S CROCHETED TURBAN (HAT)

(See the picture opposite page 40—color plate)

    Material: Old rose or blue four-fold Germantown zephyr.

    Gray Germantown zephyr for trimming.

    Bone crochet hook No. 5.

    Directions:


_To Make the Top of the Crown of the Hat_

    1. With rose or blue yarn make 5 chain stitches.

    2. Join the chain in a ring with slip stitch.

    3. Make 1 chain stitch.

[Illustration: “Please.”]

[Illustration: Yarn Baby began.]

[Illustration: DOLL’S CROCHETED TURBAN (HAT)]

[Illustration: “Use me.”]

[Illustration: Germantown zephyr.]

    4. Put 2 single crochet stitches in each chain stitch
    in the ring (10 single crochet stitches in all). Tie a
    piece of sewing cotton in the last stitch to mark end
    of row. (See picture A, page 101.)

    NOTE.—In making the turban, put the crochet hook
    through back loop only of the stitches already made.
    (See picture A, page 101.)

    5. Second row: Put 2 single crochets in each stitch.

    6. Third row: Put 1 single crochet in each of the first
    2 stitches. Put 2 single crochets in third stitch.

    NOTE.—When 2 or more stitches are put into 1 stitch in
    this way, it makes the work fuller or larger. This is
    called “increasing.”

    Put 1 single crochet in each of the next 2 stitches.
    Put 2 single crochets in next stitch. Continue in this
    way until end of this row.

    7. Fourth row: Same as third row.

    8. Fifth row: Increase, by putting 2 single crochets
    in every fifth stitch, and continue in this way until
    there are 8 full rows.

[Illustration: A]


_To Make the Side of Crown, or the Band_

    1. Make 58 chain stitches. Join in a ring with slip
    stitch.

    2. Make 1 single crochet in each stitch of the chain.

    3. Second row: Put 1 single crochet in each single
    crochet, taking up back loop only. Continue doing this
    until there are 6 full rows.

    The turned-up band of gray is made in the same way as
    the band just finished.

[Illustration: B]

[Illustration: To increase]


_To Put Turban Together_

[Illustration: Join in a ring.]

    1. Hold the right side of the crown toward you. Hold
    the top edge of the rose or blue band (not the
    chain-stitched edge) to the edge of the crown. Baste
    edges together. Catch edges of crown and band together
    with single crochet stitches.

    2. Place gray band inside of the rose or blue band,
    with the right side against the inside (or wrong side)
    of the rose or blue band. Thread a zephyr needle or a
    darning needle with gray yarn, and sew the edges neatly
    together. (Picture B on page 101 shows the two bands
    spread open after they have been sewed together.)

    3. Turn the gray band up on the outside of turban and
    sew a rosette on the left side of the crown and on the
    turned-up band.


_To Make Rosette_

    Lay the ends of the two colors of zephyr together side
    by side.

    With a large crochet hook (about No. 8) make 45 chain
    stitches. Break off yarns and fasten ends.

    Form the chain into 6 flat loops and sew on left side
    of turban, using gray yarn in a zephyr or darning
    needle.

[Illustration: To make rosette.]

As soon as it was finished, Mary Frances put the turban on Mary Marie.
Then she put the scarf which matched it around the dolly’s neck.

“Doesn’t she look sweet!” she exclaimed. “I’ll let you all kiss her.”

“Oh, excuse—!” began Crow Shay, but he never finished the sentence, for
there came a voice at the door. It was Katie’s voice.

[Illustration: “Doesn’t she look sweet!”]

“Miss Mary Frances! You haven’t been out at all to-day!” she said.
“Your mother wouldn’t like that.”

Mary Frances ran to the door. “Why, Katie, that’s so! I must go out.
I’ll get ready right away. I’ve been doing some crocheting.”

“That’s fine,” Katie said. “I wish I knew how to crochet.”

“Maybe I can teach you some time after I learn more myself,” said Mary
Frances.

“I should love to learn.” Katie looked pleased. “Well, I must be about
my work now,” she added, and went downstairs again.

[Illustration: “I should love to.”]

When Mary Frances turned back to the sewing table nothing was to be
seen but the empty rocking-chair and the knitting bag.

“Oh, dear,” she thought, “where can everybody be?”

She lifted the bag. Underneath was Mary Marie just as she had dressed
her.

She put her hand into the bag and found Wooley Ball and the Yarn Baby,
but could not find Crow Shay.

“What is the little rascal hiding for?” she wondered.

[Illustration: Out popped Crow Shay.]

“Look in the chest of yarns,” said Wooley Ball.

Mary Frances opened the lid. Out popped Crow Shay’s little round head.

    “So scared was I,
       I thought I’d die;
     So ran and hid—
       That’s why! That’s why!”

he sang.

[Illustration: “So scared was I.”]

“And Fairly Flew,” asked Mary Frances; “where is she?”

[Illustration: “Where is she?”]

    “She’s gone! She’s gone!
       Been gone before;
     But she’ll come back
      Some more, some more,”

promised Crow Shay, and the little girl went happily out to play.

[Illustration: GOING SHOPPING

FOR DIRECTIONS FOR MAKING KNITTED ARTICLES SHOWN IN THIS ILLUSTRATION
SEE SHOPPING BAG—242 CROCHETED HAND BAG—248 CROCHETED PURSE—255
CROCHETED WOOL FLOSS SCARF—84 CROCHETED TOQUE OR CAP—93]




CHAPTER XVII

MARY MARIE COMES TO LIFE


THE next morning, after breakfast, Mary Frances hurried to her room,
hoping to have another delightful lesson.

“Aunt Maria will be so surprised to see what I’ve done,” she whispered.
“And mother will be so pleased.”

“You surely will surprise them,” said the Yarn Baby, “and if I am not
mistaken we will have to work with all our might to get everything
ready by the time they come home.”

[Illustration: “You surely will surprise them.]

“Indeed we will!” said Mary Frances, getting things ready for work. “I
wonder what comes next?”

[Illustration: “Indeed we will!”]

“Oh, excuse me,” she exclaimed after a moment, “I must go get my
dolly. I put her to bed in the playroom last night.”

When she lifted Mary Marie out of her little bed and stood her on the
floor, the little thing looked at her and said, “Mamma, my tootsies are
told.”

“Oh, can you talk again?” cried Mary Frances. “Is it true, or am I
dreaming?”

[Illustration: “Can you talk?”]

“’Torse it’s true,” answered Mary Marie. “’Torse it’s true. Fairly Flew
tame in the night and tissed me.”

“What did she tell you, dear?” asked Mary Frances, lifting the doll in
her arms.

“She said that I tould talk until the lessons were over.”

“Oh, I hope that they last as long as I live!” said Mary Frances,
hugging the doll close.

“Toe do I!” Mary Marie said. “But my foots are told.”

[Illustration: “My tootsies are told.”]

“Oh, you darling!” cried Mary Frances. “You want me to make you a pair
of slippers!”

“Please, Mamma,” said the little doll.

So Mary Frances dressed her in her bathrobe, and carried her into the
sewing room and sat her on the table.

“How I wish I had a little ball for her to play with,” she said.

Then the Yarn Baby asked, “Why not make her one? I’ll give you the
directions:


BABY’S BALL

    (See picture opposite page 136—color plate)

    Make the same way as the pompons on the Doll’s Toque
    (page 95), using circles 3 inches across with a 1-inch
    opening in the center. Wind until center is almost
    filled.

[Illustration: Baby’s ball.]

“Never throw away ends of yarn,” Wooley Ball added. “You can make them
into a beautiful baby’s ball—no matter how many different colors there
are; or you can make a ball for your mother to use as a—


HAIR PIN BALL[D]

(See picture opposite page 40—color plate)

    Make in same way as pompons on Doll’s Toque, using
    circles of cardboard 3½ inches across, and a 1-inch
    opening in the center. Wind until opening is almost
    filled.

“Oh, I will give mother one on her birthday!” said Mary Frances.

Soon she set to work and made a baby’s ball for Mary Marie.

[Illustration: “I’ll give directions.”]

“Pretty ball!” said the dolly, trying to catch it in her hands again
and again. Suddenly she began to cry.

“Why, what is the matter, dear?” asked Mary Frances.

“Foots told,” the baby sobbed.

Mary Frances laid the dolly’s shawl over her feet. “Is that better?”
she asked. “Oh, how I wish I knew how to make you a pair of slippers!”

[Illustration: “You will soon learn”]

“You will soon learn how to do that,” said the Yarn Baby, and gave the
directions for making—


DOLL’S CROCHETED BEDROOM SLIPPERS

(See picture opposite page 200)

[Illustration]

    Material: Pink or light blue Germantown zephyr. Bone
    crochet hook No. 3.

    Directions:

    The work is begun at the toe of the slipper. See “A” in
    the picture on page 109.

[Illustration: “Foots told,” the baby sobbed.]

    1. Make 8 chain stitches.

    2. Skip 1 chain, and put 1 single crochet in each of 3
    chain stitches.

    3. Put 3 single crochets in the fourth chain stitch.

    4. Put 1 single crochet in the next 3 chain stitches.
    Make 1 chain to use in turning. (In single crochet
    work, always make 1 chain in turning.)

    5. Second row: Put 1 single crochet in each stitch,
    taking the back thread only of the stitch. (The first
    and second rows form a “rib.” The slippers are made of
    “ribs.”)

[Illustration]

    6. Third row: Put 1 single crochet in each of 4
    stitches. Put 3 single crochets in the fifth stitch.
    Put 1 single crochet in each of the next 4 stitches.

    NOTE.—The adding of stitches, as in the fifth stitch,
    is called “increasing.”

    7. Fourth row: Put 1 single crochet in each stitch.

[Illustration: Single crochet.]

    8. Fifth row: Increase as in direction No. 6 in sixth
    stitch.

    9. Sixth row: 1 single crochet in each stitch.

    This row completes the toe part, or front of the
    slipper.

    10. Seventh row: This row starts the sides. Make 1
    single crochet in each of 6 stitches. Make 1 chain to
    turn.

[Illustration: To join slipper.]

    11. Eighth row: Make 1 single crochet in each stitch.
    Make 9 ribs for the sides of the slipper.


_To Join Side to Toe_

    Hold the edge of the ninth rib (D) to edge of opposite
    side of front (C), right sides facing each other. (See
    picture page 109.)

    Join edges with single crochet stitches, taking up 1
    loop only of the stitches forming the ribs.


_To Form the Toe_

    Fold tip of toe together, bringing A to B. (See page
    109.)

    Thread a darning or zephyr needle with yarn and sew tip
    of slipper toe together.

[Illustration: Join at A and B]

[Illustration: Fold tip of toe.]


_To Make Top of Slipper_

[Illustration]

    Spaces for runners are made in this way: Starting[E] at
    corner at right side of top (A), make 2 chain stitches.
    Join them with a slip stitch to the point at the top of
    the nearest rib.

    Continue in this way all around top of slipper.


_To Make Trimming at Top_

    Make 3 chain stitches. Put crochet hook through the
    first runner space and make a slip stitch. Make 3
    chains and put a slip stitch in the next runner space.
    Continue all around top of slipper.

[Illustration: Thread this into runner.]


_To Make Runner_

    Make a chain of 45 chain stitches.

    Thread this into the runner spaces just as in making
    doll’s petticoat (see page 90), and put tassels on the
    ends.


_To Make Tassels_

(See pictures on opposite page)

[Illustration: To make tassels.]

    1. Cut a piece of cardboard 1 inch long and ½ inch wide.

    2. Over this, wind a strand of yarn 10 times.

    3. Thread a long-eyed zephyr needle with yarn. Slip it
    under the yarn on the cardboard and tie it together at
    the top.

    4. Clip the yarn apart at the other edge of the card.

    Hold the clipped ends between the thumb and fingers of
    the left hand, and tie the tassel with a piece of yarn,
    to look like picture No. 3.

    Thread the ends of the tie-string into a long-eyed
    needle. Pull the ends down through the middle of the
    tassel and cut them off even with the bottom.

    Thread a zephyr needle with both ends of yarn at top of
    tassel and pull needle through one end of the runner.

    Fasten the ends by pulling needle through tassel from
    the top. Cut off ends even with tassel fringe. (See
    picture No. 4.)


_To Make Slipper Soles_

    Lay doll’s shoe on a piece of light-weight cardboard
    and mark it with a pencil; cut it out. Or trace the
    outline below, and use it as a pattern.

    Thread zephyr needle with yarn, and sew slipper to sole.

When the Yarn Baby had finished giving the long directions for the
slippers, Crow Shay, who had been very quiet, could not keep still
another second.

[Illustration: “Whew! Yarn Baby!”]

“Whew! Yarn Baby!” he broke in. “Whew! How do you know so much? You
certainly are a woolly-headed know-it-all!”

At first the Yarn Baby did not know what to say to this impudent
speech. Then her hair stood up stiff and straight.

“If I’m—if I’m a woolly-head,” she cried, “you’re an old bone-head! So
you are! So there!”

Crow Shay grew pale, stood up on end and started for the Yarn Baby,
when Wooley Ball just rolled in his way and Crow Shay pitched over her,
head first.

“Mind your manners, Crow Shay! Mind your manners!” said Wooley Ball
calmly.

All the Knitting People laughed merrily at Crow Shay’s silly caper,
except poor Crow Shay, who looked a little ashamed of himself.

[Illustration: Trace this pattern.]




CHAPTER XVIII

THE MAGIC RHYME


MARY FRANCES, who wanted to laugh, too, pretended not to notice, and
picked up a ball of pink yarn.

[Illustration: A ball of pink yarn.]

“If only I had Fairly Flew’s magic needle!” she said, “I could get the
slippers finished very soon for my poor baby’s cold feet.”

She started to pick up Crow Shay.

[Illustration: “Wait a moment!”]

“Wait a moment! Wait a moment!” exclaimed the little fellow who was
himself again. “Don’t you want to call the fairy teacher?”

“If I only knew how to, I certainly should call her, Crow Shay,”
replied Mary Frances. “You help me a good deal, but——”

“Oh, I know!” said Crow Shay. “I can’t do what Fairly Flew can do for
you, but I can do this much; I can tell you how to summon her.”

“Will you please tell me?” begged Mary Frances.

[Illustration: “Indeed he will.”]

“Indeed he will,” spoke up the Yarn Baby, who forgave very quickly. “We
all love you because you are so anxious to learn our lessons. Begin,
Crow Shay.”

“All right,” said Crow Shay. “When you want the fairy Fairly Flew
during our lessons, just whisper this little rhyme:

    “‘Fairy Fairly Flew,
      Please come, for I need you.’”

“That’s easy!” cried Mary Frances, repeating the rhyme:

    “Fairy Fairly Flew,
     Please come, for I need you.”

[Illustration: “Here I am, little girl.”]

She had scarcely finished speaking when there came the light rustle of
wings; and a tiny voice of silvery sweetness said, “Here I am, little
girl. I always come to help those who try to learn their lessons. They
may not always see me, but I put magic into their needles after they
practice what they learn. They may not be able to work quite as quickly
as you do when I am with you, but they can work pretty fast—so fast
that people may say that the needles fairly flew.”

“How glad I am that you help other little girls, too,” said Mary
Frances, taking the magic needle which the fairy held out. “Thank you
for coming to me, dear Fairly Flew!”

Then she started to make the slippers—and you know how quickly they
were finished.

[Illustration: “Aren’t they beautiful?”]

“Aren’t they beautiful?” cried Mary Frances. “Now my dolly’s feet will
keep warm.” And she put them on Mary Marie’s little feet.

[Illustration: “Footies nice and warm.”]

“Footies nice and warm,” gurgled Mary Marie; “footies hidin’ away from
Jack Frost,” and went on playing with her ball.

[Illustration: “Won’t that be splendid?”]




CHAPTER XIX

MARY MARIE’S SCHOOL BAG


AFTER everybody had admired the little slippers, the Yarn Baby
said, “If Mary Marie goes to kindergarten, she should have a little
school-bag to carry her pictures and books in, I think.”

[Illustration: “Has she a school-bag?”]

“Wouldn’t that be splendid!” cried Mary Frances. “What kind of yarn
shall I use?”

[Illustration: “Let me look into the box.”]

“Let me look into the box,” replied Wooley Ball, rolling over to the
end of the sewing table and peeping over the edge of the chest, “Oh,
there is the very thing to use—ecru crochet cotton. Cotton will wear
much better than wool for a bag.” As Mary Frances picked up the ball,
the Yarn Baby began to give the directions for making—


DOLL’S CROCHETED BOOK BAG

(See color plate page 40)

[Illustration]


[Illustration: Dolly’s books.]

[Illustration: Dolly at school.]

    Material: Ecru crochet cotton (mercerized).

    Steel hook No. 7.

    Directions:[F]

    1. Make 26 chain stitches.

    2. Put 1 double crochet stitch into the fourth chain
    stitch from the needle.

    3. Put 1 double crochet into the fifth chain stitch.

    4. Put 1 double crochet stitch into the sixth chain.

    5. Make 2 chain stitches.

    6. Skip 2 chain stitches in the first row, and put 1
    double crochet into the next chain stitch; that is,
    into the third chain stitch from the last double
    crochet stitch which you made.

    7. Put a double crochet in each of the next 2 chain
    stitches.

    8. Repeat directions No. 5, 6, and 7 to end of chain.

    9. Make 5 chain stitches to use in turning.

[Illustration: Make 5 chain stitches.]

    10. Put 3 double crochet stitches into the first space
    of the row just made.

    11. Make 2 chain stitches.

    12. Continue making clusters of 3 double crochets in
    each space with 2 chains between—to end of row. The
    last stitch in the row will be 1 double crochet taken
    into the top of the 3 chain stitches which were used in
    turning the row below.

    13. Continue making rows like these two until there are
    6 rows. This makes one side of the bag.

    14. Taking up the threads on the other side of the
    first row of chain stitches which you made, make other
    side of bag like first side. (See picture below.)

[Illustration]

    15. Fold the two sides of bag together, along the row
    of chain stitches first made, and fasten them together
    with single crochet stitches along the edge, catching
    each side.

    16. Make 1 row of single crochet all around the top of
    the bag.

[Illustration: Book bag.]


_To Make the Handle_

[Illustration: Make handle.]

    1. At the top of the first cluster of double crochet
    stitches from the side, make 2 single crochet stitches.
    (See picture, page 118.)

    2. Make 1 chain stitch to use in turning.

    3. Make 2 single crochet stitches.

    4. Continue directions Nos. 1 and 2 until handle is 2½
    inches long. Fasten the end of handle into the top of
    the first cluster of double crochet stitches from the
    other side of the bag, using slip stitch.

    5. Make another handle on opposite side of bag in same
    way.

    NOTE.—In fastening ends of threads, be sure to pull the
    last stitch very tight before cutting off the ends.

When Mary Frances had finished making the little bag, she hung it on
the dolly’s arm.

[Illustration: Hung it on the dolly’s arm.]

“Doe to tool! Doe to tool, now!” cried Mary Marie.

“Not in your bathrobe and slippers, darling!”

“Den what s’all I do?” asked Mary Marie. “I’se tired of ball! Wish I
had a dolly!”




CHAPTER XX

A LETTER FROM MOTHER


“THE poor little dear!” exclaimed Fairly Flew, “a doll she shall have,
and I will tell you how to make it myself—a doll that looks ever so
much like Mary Frances’ own dolly, our dear Yarn Baby!”

[Illustration: “Poor little dear!”]

Then she told the little girl—


HOW TO MAKE AN INFANT YARN DOLL

    Material: White knitting worsted.[G] A strand of coarse
    red embroidery cotton. Two blue beads for eyes. (See
    picture, page 122.)

    Directions:

    1. Cut about 20 strands of yarn, each 8 inches long.
    Lay them together side by side.

    2. Tie them together in the middle with a short piece
    of yarn. Fold them over in the middle where tied.

[Illustration: Tie in middle.]

    3. About ½ inch below the fold, tie in the same way as
    you did the tassel on doll’s slippers. (See picture No.
    3 on Plate 3.) This forms the infant’s head.

[Illustration: To make shoulder.]

    4. To make the arms, take hold of 4 strands of the
    yarn and tie a knot close to the neck. This forms the
    shoulder. About ½ inch below the shoulder knot, trim
    off the 4 strands. Tie the 4 strands together with a
    short piece of yarn to form the hand.

    5. Make the other arm opposite in the same way.

    6. About ¾ of an inch below the neck, tie the long
    strands together to form infant’s waist.

    7. Sew two small blue beads in head for eyes, and take
    a stitch with red embroidery cotton to form the mouth.

[Illustration: DINAH DOLL AND INFANT]

“Baby! Baby!” cried Mary Marie as soon as Mary Frances had it finished.

[Illustration: “Baby! Baby!”]

“How she loves that doll!” cried Crow Shay. “She ought to have a
nurse-maid to help her care for it.”

“Indeed she ought to,” declared the Yarn Baby. “I would like to tell
the little Miss how to make a Dinah Doll.”

[Illustration: “Indeed she ought to.”]

“Do tell her now,” said Fairly Flew.

[Illustration: “Do tell her now.”]

So the Yarn Baby began:


HOW TO MAKE A COLORED YARN DOLL

    Material: Black knitting worsted.[H] White knitting
    worsted. A strand of coarse red embroidery cotton. Two
    white beads for eyes. (See page 122.)

    Directions:

    1. Cut about 50 strands of black worsted 12 inches
    long. Tie them together in the middle and fold.

    2. Tie them again about 1½ inches below the fold to
    form Dinah’s head.

    3. At each side of the body, close to the neck, take 8
    strands and tie together in a knot to form shoulders
    and arms.

    4. Trim off the strands about 2 inches below the knots,
    and tie with white yarn near ends—to form hands.

    5. Cut 30 strands of white yarn about 8 inches long.
    Lay them together, side by side. Tie them together very
    loosely in the middle, fold them in the middle, where
    tied. Tie the bundle of strands around doll’s neck to
    form front of dress.

    6. Follow direction No. 5 and tie in back of doll to
    form back of dress.

    7. Cut a piece of black yarn about 8 inches long and
    tie it in a bow knot around the doll about 1½ inches
    from the neck, to form the doll’s waist.

    8. At the bottom, with a short piece of white yarn, tie
    together about 6 strands of black yarn, to form a foot.

    9. Make another foot in the same way.

    10. Trim off the other strands of yarn at the bottom
    about ½ inch above the feet.

    11. Sew two white beads in place for eyes, and take two
    stitches with red embroidery cotton to form the mouth.

    Sew infant doll in place in Dinah’s arm.

    To make the hair, cut 25 short strands of black worsted
    and sew with black thread to top of Dinah’s head.

    Trim hair with bow made of narrow red ribbon.

When Mary Frances finished the funny colored doll, she sewed the white
infant baby in the arm, to the delight of Mary Marie and the Knitting
People.

[Illustration: Eyelids began to droop.]

Soon Mary Marie’s eyelids began to droop; then Mary Frances carried her
off to bed, and she went to sleep with the dolls in her arms.

[Illustration: To the delight of the Crochet People]

“Oh, how I wish that I could tell mother about my lovely times,”
thought Mary Frances. “Maybe when all my lessons are finished I shall
be able to tell her. She would not worry about my being lonely if she
knew how busy I am, and how happy now since I know that dear father is
getting well.”

Just then Billy called her and she hurried downstairs.

[Illustration: Billy called her.]

“Here is a letter from mother for you,” said Billy, meeting her at the
foot of the stairs. “Hurry and read it. I want to hear about father.”

So Mary Frances opened it and read:

[Illustration: “Dear Mary Frances.”]


    _Dear Mary Frances_:

    _You will be glad to hear that father is safe in the
    hospital and improving very rapidly. His leg was broken
    just above the ankle, and he is suffering from the
    shock of the accident. The doctors say that it will be
    a week or ten days, perhaps longer, before we can bring
    him home._

    _I am sending a newspaper which tells about the train
    wreck and explains how it happened._

    _You and Billy are in my thoughts every hour of the
    day and many times at night, too; but I am not worried
    because I know that Katie will take good care of you
    both._

    _Father says that he is racing with time to get well
    enough to return home to you dear children, and that he
    will tell you the whole story when he arrives._

    _Aunt Maria sends love and says that she will teach you
    to crochet when she comes—and that you may practice the
    stitches which she has already taught you._

    _I shut my eyes and see you in my mind’s eye, but I
    want to be able soon to see you really and truly._

    _Hugs and kisses from_

                                          _Mother._

“Good news!” exclaimed Billy as Mary Frances finished reading; “but
it’s no fun to have a broken leg.”

[Illustration: “Good news!”]

“Oh, Billy, think how much worse it might have been,” cried Mary
Frances. “Won’t we be glad to see father and mother back—and Aunt
Maria?” and she caught him by the arm and waltzed him around the big
hall.

[Illustration: “Oh, Billy.”]




CHAPTER XXI

A TEDDY BEAR SUIT


“I DO wonder what the Crochet People have planned for the next lesson,”
thought Mary Frances as she went upstairs after breakfast the next
morning.

[Illustration: “I do wonder.”]

When she went into the playroom she was surprised to find Mary Marie
sitting on the side of her bed, trying to put on her little slippers.

[Illustration: Put on her little slippers.]

“What!” exclaimed Mary Frances. “Awake so early—and trying to dress
yourself?”

“’Es, Mamma,” answered Mary Marie. “I’se detting weady to doe to tool.”

“Bless your little heart!” cried Mary Frances. “Here, let me help
you!” and she soon put on Mary Marie’s little shoes and stockings, and
dressed her.

“What shall I wear wound me, Mamma?” asked the dolly. “It’s too warm
for a toat, and too told to doe wifout somet’ing wound me.”

“Let me see,” said Mary Frances, thinking hard.

“If Mary M’rie only had a twetter!” sighed the wise young lady.

[Illustration: “If I only had a twetter!”]

Mary Frances caught her up in her arms. “The very thing!” she cried.
“Let us go see the Crochet People.”

Just as she sat Mary Marie on the table, Crow Shay began:

    “For young or old,
     When it is cold,
     Nothing is better
     Than a sweater.”

[Illustration: Crow Shay began.]

“Oh!” exclaimed Mary Frances. “Oh, Crow Shay, how did you ever guess
what we want so much?”

“Every doll in the world ought to have a sweater,” he declared. “And
the sooner Fairly Flew comes, the sooner Mary Marie will get one.”

So Mary Frances said the magic rhyme:

    “Fairy Fairly Flew,
     Please come, for I need you;”

and the fairy helper came.

“What do you wish for?” she asked, seating herself in the doll’s
rocking-chair.

[Illustration: “What do you wish for?”]

“A sweater for Mary Marie, dear Fairly Flew,” Mary Frances answered.

“A twetter! A twetter!” laughed the little doll, looking up. “Doe to
tool.”

[Illustration: “A twetter! A twetter!”]

“Bless her heart—and yours, too, little girl,” said Fairly Flew; “she
shall have not only a sweater, but a whole outfit to keep her warm when
she goes to school, for I myself will give you directions for making a—


TEDDY BEAR SUIT

Consisting of Sweater, Tam, and Long Leggings

(See picture opposite page 168—color plate.)

    Material: “Old blue” or peacock blue knitting worsted.

    Bone crochet hook No. 5.


DOLL’S CROCHETED SWEATER

    (Be sure to make the articles already described in this
    story before attempting to make the Teddy Bear Outfit.)


    Directions:

    This work is begun with the front.

    1. Make 26 chain stitches.

    2. Make 25 single crochet stitches.

    3. Make 1 chain to turn. Always make 1 chain stitch to
    use in turning, unless told to do otherwise.

    4. Make 12 rows (in all) of 25 single crochet stitches,
    taking up both loops of stitches below.

    5. On the thirteenth row, make only 15 single crochets.
    Make only 15 single crochets for 6 rows (in all). These
    rows come under the arm of the doll. You will then have
    made 18 rows.

    6. On the nineteenth row, make 15 single crochets and
    11 chain stitches.

    7. On the twentieth row, make 25 single crochets.

    8. Make 21 rows of 25 single crochets for the back of
    the sweater. This makes 39 rows from the beginning.

    9. On the fortieth row make 15 single crochets for 6
    rows, under arm.

[Illustration: “A really sweater!”]

[Illustration: “Oh me! Oh my!”]

    10. On the forty-seventh row, add 11 chains, and
    crochet 12 rows of 25 single crochet stitches.


_To Make Armholes_

    Thread a zephyr needle with the worsted, and sew 6 rows
    of the front to 6 rows of the back (A to A, B to B. See
    picture, page 130). Do the same to the other side.

[Illustration: “Does it fit?”]


_To Make Border on Edge around Sweater_

    1. Hold the outside of the sweater toward you. Starting
    at the left side of the neck, take up both loops of
    each stitch with single crochet all around sweater to
    right side of neck.

[Illustration: Try on Dolly.]

    NOTE.—In turning corners at bottom use 3 single
    crochets in 1 stitch.

    2. Make 1 chain stitch to use in turning, and make
    another row of single crochet in the same way all
    around sweater. This will bring you back to the
    starting stitch of border.

    3. Make 1 chain to use in turning, and make third row,
    putting only 2 single crochet stitches in corners at
    the bottom.


_To Make Collar Band_

    1. Hold right side of front of sweater toward you, and
    take up each stitch across the neck with single crochet.

    2. Make 5 rows of single crochet, using 1 chain stitch
    to turn.

    Make slip stitches all around sweater taking up back
    thread only of the stitches.


_To Fasten Sweater_

    The sweater is fastened with loops and buttons.

[Illustration: Chain stitch form loops.]


_To Make Loops_

    1. On the right-hand side of the sweater, commencing at
    the bottom, make 4 slip stitches.

    2. Make 2 chain stitches.

    3. Skip 2 stitches in the row below, and make 4 more
    slip stitches. The chain stitches form the loops.

    4. Continue doing this until the neck is reached.

    5. Make 1 loop on the end of the collar. Sew buttons on
    the left side opposite the loops.

[Illustration: Fastened with loops and buttons.]

[Illustration: Busily crocheting.]

[Illustration: Chain stitch to use in turning.]


_To Make the Sleeves_

    1. Make 9 chain stitches.

    2. Make 8 single crochet stitches.

    3. Always make 1 chain stitch to use in turning single
    crochet.

    4. Second row: Taking up both threads of the row of
    single crochets just made, make 2 single crochets in
    the first stitch, and 1 in each stitch to the end of
    the row. This will make 9 stitches.

    5. Make 3 chains, and turn the work.

    6. Third row: Make 1 single crochet in each of the two
    chain stitches, and single crochets to the end of the
    row, making 11 stitches in all. Make 1 chain to turn.

    7. Fourth row: Make 2 single crochets in the first
    stitch and single crochets to the end of row, making 12
    stitches in all.

    8. Fifth row: Make 5 chain stitches. Make 4 single
    crochets in the chain stitches, and single crochets to
    the end of row, making 16 stitches.

    9. Sixth row: Make 2 single crochet stitches in the
    first stitch and single crochets to the end, making 17
    stitches.

    10. Seventh row: Make 17 single crochets.

    11. Eighth row: Make 2 single crochets in first stitch
    and single crochets to the end of row, making 18
    stitches.

    12. Make 6 rows of 18 single crochet stitches.

    13. On the fifteenth row, make single crochets, but
    skip next to the last stitch, making 17 single crochet
    stitches.

    14. Sixteenth row: Make 17 single crochet stitches.

    15. Seventeenth row: Make single crochets across row,
    but skip next to the last stitch, making 16 stitches.

    16. Eighteenth row: Make 16 single crochet stitches.

    17. Nineteenth row: Make slip stitches in the first
    four stitches. Single crochet to the end, skipping next
    to the last stitch, making 11 stitches.

    18. Twentieth row: Make 11 single crochet stitches.

    19. Twenty-first row: Make 2 slip stitches, and single
    crochet to the end of row, skipping next to the last
    stitch, making 8 stitches.

    20. Twenty-second row: Make 8 single crochets. Break
    off and fasten the yarn.

    Make another sleeve like this one.

    21. Sew up the sleeves.

    22. Pin seam to the front corner of the armhole (A) and
    sew in place. (See picture, page 131.)

[Illustration: “Row! row! another row”]

[Illustration: “Look out, Crow Shay!”]

    23. Put 2 rows of single crochet around the end of
    sleeve at wrist.

    Add one row of slip stitches below these. Do not make
    this row of slip stitches very tight.


_To Make the Pockets_

    1. Make 7 chain stitches.

    2. Make 7 rows of 6 single crochets.

    3. Put 1 row of single crochet across the top of pocket.

    4. Put 1 row of slip stitches across top of pocket.

[Illustration]

    Make another pocket in same way.

    Sew pockets on the sweater, about 1 inch from bottom
    and 1 inch from sides.

[Illustration: Sew pocket on sweater.]


DOLL’S CROCHETED TAM

(See picture on page 136)

    Material: Old blue or peacock blue knitting worsted.
    Bone crochet hook No. 5.

    Directions:

    1. Make 4 chain stitches.

    2. Join the chain in a ring with slip stitch.

[Illustration: Join in a ring.]

    3. Make 10 single crochets into the center of the ring.

    4. Tie a piece of white sewing thread to the tenth
    single crochet stitch, to mark the beginning of the
    next row around.

    5. Second round. Make 2 single crochets in each
    stitch, taking up back loop of thread in each stitch
    of row just finished.

[Illustration: DOLL’S CROCHETED TAM]

    6. Third row: Make 2 single crochets in the first
    stitch, 1 single crochet in the next stitch, and
    continue making 2 single crochets in the next stitch
    and 1 single crochet in the next stitch to the end of
    the round.

    7. Fourth round. “Increase,” or put 2 single crochet
    stitches in every third stitch. Make 1 single crochet
    in the other stitches.

    8. Fifth round. Increase in every fifth stitch.

[Illustration: “Increase! Increase!”]

    9. Sixth round. Make 1 single crochet in each stitch.

    10. Repeat fifth and sixth rounds until there are 11
    full rows.

    The work should measure about 5 inches across.

[Illustration: “Don’t I look tweet?”]

    11. Twelfth round. Begin to “decrease,” or narrow, the
    tam to fit the head of doll.

[Illustration: BABY BLUE AND BABY PINK

FOR DIRECTIONS FOR MAKING KNITTED ARTICLES SHOWN IN THIS ILLUSTRATION
SEE

BEDROOM SLIPPERS—108 CROCHETED SOCKS—228 CROCHETED CAP—229

CROCHETED SACQUE, NO. 2—232 CAPE AND HOOD—236 BABY’S BALL—107]


_How to “Decrease” in Crocheting_

    Pull a loop through of each of 2 stitches, and take
    them off the crochet needle as if they were one loop,
    thus forming a single crochet; that is, pull a loop
    through the 3 loops then on the needle. (See picture
    below.)

[Illustration]

    On the twelfth round of the tam, decrease on the first
    2 stitches, then make 5 single crochet stitches. Then
    decrease on next 2 stitches and make 5 single crochets.
    Continue decreasing in this way until tam fits doll’s
    head.

[Illustration: “Can you read?”]

    About 4 rows of decreasing will be needed, which makes
    15 full rows from starting place. Do not break off
    yarn, but learn how—


_To Make the Head Band_

[Illustration: “Won’t this be lovely?”]

    Make 4 rows of single crochet, taking up both threads
    of stitches in rounds just finished. Break off the yarn
    and fasten the end by making a slip stitch and pulling
    end all the way through the last loop.


_To Make the Tassel_

    1. Cut a strip of cardboard, making it 1½ inches wide
    and about 2 inches long.

    2. Cut off 2 pieces of yarn, each measuring 1 yard, lay
    them together, side by side.

    3. Wind the 2 pieces of yarn over the narrower part of
    the cardboard.

    4. Tie as in making tassels for doll’s slippers. (See
    Plate 3.)

    5. Make 18 chain stitches, and fasten tassel to the
    chain as on runner for doll’s slippers. Put the other
    end of the chain through the hole in the center of the
    top of the tam, and sew it down in place on the wrong
    side.

[Illustration: Make tassel.]


CROCHETED TEDDY BEAR LEGGINGS

(See pictures on pages 139 and 140.)

    Material: Old blue or peacock blue knitting worsted.

    Bone or celluloid crochet hook No. 5.

[Illustration: Blue worsted.]

    Directions:

    This work is begun at the waist line.

    1. Make 50 chain stitches.

    2. Join chain with slip stitch and make 1 chain stitch
    to use in turning.

    3. Make 1 single crochet in each stitch of the chain,
    making 50 single crochets. Join last single crochet
    stitch to first single crochet with slip stitch. Make 1
    chain stitch to use in turning.

[Illustration: FRONT OF LEGGINGS]

    4. Make 5 rows of single crochet stitches, taking up
    both loops of each stitch in row below. Join end stitch
    with first as explained in direction No. 3.

[Illustration: “Yes, Stupid!”]

    5. On the sixth row, in order to form the fullness in
    the seat, make 38 single crochet stitches. Turn without
    making a chain stitch. Make 26 single crochets. Turn
    again without a chain stitch, and continue making
    single crochet to end of row, or joining point.

    6. Make the seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth rows of
    single crochet stitches.

[Illustration: “Eleventh row?”]

    7. Make the eleventh row in the same way as you made
    the sixth row. (See direction No. 5.)

[Illustration: BACK OF LEGGINGS]

    8. Make the twelfth row of single crochet.

    9. On the thirteenth row begin to decrease the
    stitches, or to narrow the work. When you reach the
    twelfth stitch, take off 2 stitches as one. Do the rest
    of the row in single crochet except when you reach the
    thirty-eighth stitch, when you take off 2 stitches as
    one. There should be 48 single crochet stitches in the
    thirteenth row.

    10. Continue to make 48 stitches in each row until
    there are 18 rows in front. Do not break off the yarn.
    You will have a loop on the crochet needle.

[Illustration: “A perfect fit!”]

    You will use this loop in making the separation for the
    leg part of the Teddy Bear Leggings.

[Illustration: Trying on.]

    11. With the loop on the crochet needle, put the hook
    through the twenty-fourth single crochet stitch, on the
    opposite side, throw the yarn over the hook, and pull
    it through both stitches. Now you will work in a circle
    around the leg.

    12. Make 24 single crochet stitches, and join the
    twenty-fourth to the first stitch in the leg part,
    with a slip stitch. Make 1 chain to turn. This is the
    nineteenth row of the garment.

    13. Make the twentieth row of single crochet and join
    last and first stitches.

    On the twenty-first row, begin to narrow the leg. Make
    single crochet stitches until you reach the eleventh
    stitch. Then take off 2 stitches as one. Continue with
    single crochet to end of row and join stitches.

[Illustration: “Will you be quiet?”]

    14. The twenty-second, twenty-third and twenty-fourth
    rows are of single crochet.

    15. The twenty-fifth row is like the twenty-first row.

    16. The twenty-sixth, twenty-seventh and twenty-eighth
    rows are of single crochet.

    17. The twenty-ninth row is like the twenty-first row.
    There should be 21 single crochet stitches in the
    twenty-ninth row.

    18. Continue to make 21 single crochet stitches in each
    row until you have 47 rows from the waist line in front.

    19. Next you will make the strap underneath the doll’s
    foot.

    Make 5 chain stitches, and join the last one to the
    ninth single crochet stitch with a slip stitch.

[Illustration: “Chain, chain stitch, stitch.”]

    20. Put 1 slip stitch in each stitch of chain for the
    strap. Do not break off the yarn. Next you will make
    the toe part of legging.

    21. Make 3 slip stitches, putting them into the single
    crochet stitches nearest the strap toward the front of
    the legging.

    22. Make 4 single crochet stitches and 1 chain stitch
    to use in turning.

    23. Make 4 rows of single crochets.

    24. Now make slip stitches all around the bottom of the
    legging to make a neat finish.

    25. Make another leg like this one. Begin the work at
    the inside seam or joining point of the leg just made.
    Start this row at the back of the legging.

    Next you will make spaces for a runner at the waist.

    At the top of leggings at the joining point, or seam,
    fasten yarn ready to begin new work.


_To Join New Thread_

    Put the hook through the stitch at the place where you
    need the new thread. Throw thread over hook, and pull
    the end of the thread through the stitch and tie in a
    single knot. Thread end into a zephyr needle, and run
    it into the work.

    See also page 231.

[Illustration: Put hook through.]


_To Make Runner Spaces_

    1. Make 3 chain stitches.

    2. Put a double crochet in each of the next 14 stitches.

    3. Make 20 treble crochet stitches. (See picture of
    treble crochet, page 228.)

[Illustration: “Won’t I be warm?”]

    4. Make 14 double crochets.

    5. Join with a slip stitch the last double crochet
    stitch to the third chain stitch. See direction No. 1,
    above.


_To Make the Runner_

    Make a chain of 75 stitches, and thread through the
    runner spaces as in making the doll’s petticoat. (See
    page 90.)

Fairly Flew gave the directions so rapidly that Mary Frances scarcely
realized when she finished one piece of the little Teddy Bear suit and
commenced on another.

[Illustration: Fairly Flew.]

When the three pieces were finished, “Good!” exclaimed the fairy. “The
reason that I talked so fast was that I was so anxious to see how your
baby would look when dressed like a Teddy Bear.”

“Come here, dear,” said Mary Frances, holding out her arms, and Mary
Marie ran to her.

“Twick, Mamma! Twick!” she cried, trying to get into the sweater by
herself.

[Illustration: “Twick, Mamma! Twick!”]

Mary Frances helped her and soon she was dressed.

“Doesn’t she look dear!” exclaimed Mary Frances, kissing her.

“She looks too cunning for anything!” said the Yarn Baby.

“I could roll yarn for her all my life,” declared Wooley Ball.

[Illustration: “I could roll yarn all my life.”]

“Isn’t it wonderful to make such a beautiful thing out of a string?”
asked Crow Shay. “I should think that everybody would learn to know us
nice Crochet People.”

“I should, too,” said Mary Frances. “I wish all my friends——”

[Illustration: “I should too.”]

“Hush!” exclaimed Fairly Flew. “I think I hear a step!” And she melted
out of sight.

“Tate Mary M’rie for a walk, Mamma?” the little doll asked as Mary
Frances took her up in her arms; but when they reached the foot of
the stairs, Mary Marie began to look like a doll again, and stared at
things just as dolls do.

“She is afraid some one will see her, and the fairy has told her not to
talk,” thought Mary Frances. “I guess I’ll take her upstairs again so
as to be safe.” And she went to the playroom.

“Nice walk,” said Mary Marie, leaning her head on Mary Frances’ neck
sleepily. So Mary Frances undressed her and put her to bed and then
went out to play.




CHAPTER XXII

THE FIRST KNITTING LESSON


MARY FRANCES stopped at the door of the sewing room when she went
upstairs the next morning after breakfast, for she was sure that she
heard a voice.

Crow Shay was speaking—

    “Now then unpack,
     Both Knit and Knack,
     For Fairly Flew
     Has need of you.”

[Illustration: “Now then unpack.”]

“Did she say so?” asked a little voice eagerly.

[Illustration: “Did she say so?”]

“Did she say so?” asked another little voice just as eagerly.

“Not exactly, not exactly,” answered Crow Shay; “but I saw her working
on some knitting.”

“That’s a sign, I guess,” said Knit.

“That’s a sign, I guess,” said Knack.

And they both jumped out of the knitting bag.

“Come, Wooley Ball,” cried Knit, “please help us.”

“Come, Wooley Ball,” cried Knack, “please help us.”

“Help you what?” asked Wooley Ball, rolling over toward them.

[Illustration: “Help you what?”]

“Help us teach the little Miss to knit,” replied Knit.

“Help us teach the little Miss to knit,” echoed Knack.

“I’ll help you!” Crow Shay offered.

[Illustration: “I’ll help you!”]

“You?” cried Knit. “You only crochet!”

“You?” cried Knack. “You only crochet!”

“Only?” exclaimed Crow Shay. “Only? Well, if I ever betted, I’d bet you
both that I can help teach knitting.”

“I’d like to see you!” said Knit.

“I’d like to see you!” said Knack.

“Maybe you will,” laughed Crow Shay. “I’m willing to help you,” he
added.

“Come,” thought Mary Frances. “If that little mischief keeps on, there
will be a quarrel. I must go in,” and she entered the room.

“Why, how do you do, my new friends?” she said, speaking to Knit and
Knack.

“Oh, they are pretty well, thank you,” answered Crow Shay.
“Good-morning, Miss Mary Frances.”

The Yarn Baby’s hair rose high on her head. “Wait till you’re spoken
to, Crow Shay!” said she.

[Illustration: “Wait till you’re spoken to!”]

Crow Shay stepped back on the table.

“You are Knit and Knack, my knitting needles. I know you well,” went on
Mary Frances. “I do hope that you will help me learn to knit.”

“They’re crazy to,” began Crow Shay, “and I am——”

The Yarn Baby gave him such a hard push with her soft little elbow that
he toppled off the table.

[Illustration: Toppled off the table.]

Then the Knitting twins had to laugh. They couldn’t help it.

“Oh, dear!” sighed Mary Frances, picking him up. “Oh, dear! He is so
anxious to help that he forgets his manners; but he will learn some
day.”

“I’ll call the fairy,” thought the little girl, and she said her magic
rhyme.

[Illustration: “I’ll call the fairy.”]

“Why, everybody is all ready for the next lessons,” said Fairly Flew,
looking around after she had greeted Mary Frances. “We will start at
once—

[Illustration: “We will start at once.”]


_To Make a Slip Knot_

    Material: About 2 yards four-fold Germantown wool.

    One pair bone knitting needles No. 6.


    CUT 1

    Hold yarn in hands as shown in this picture.

    CUT 2

    Let upper thread fall behind the second finger of left
    hand.

    CUT 3

    Catch it between the first and second fingers.

    CUT 4

    Pull hard on the thread in the right hand bringing the
    loop off the left-hand fingers.

    CUT 5

    Draw knot up tight.

    CUT 6

    Slip the loop on a knitting needle and draw it up close.

[Illustration: PLATE 4—MOTION PICTURES SHOWING THE RIGHT WAY TO MAKE A
SLIP KNOT—FIRST STEP IN KNITTING. SEE PAGE 148]




CHAPTER XXIII

CASTING-ON STITCHES


MARY FRANCES found that her fingers were pretty clumsy in doing this
exercise. She wished that Fairly Flew would give her a magic lesson.

[Illustration: “No, I cannot do that.”]

“No,” said the fairy, as though reading her thoughts, “I cannot do
that. Everybody has to learn in the same old way—by—trying—

    ‘If at first you don’t succeed,
       Try, try again.’”

Mary Frances tried harder than ever, and when she had made a slip knot,
every one looked delighted.

[Illustration: Every one looked delighted.]

“Now,” said Fairly Flew, “now, you are ready to try a new exercise.”

“Now, it is Knit or Knack’s turn,” thought Mary Frances, as she took up
a knitting needle. It happened to be Knack.

[Illustration: It happened to be Knack]

The fairy smiled and nodded her approval; then she said, “Now, pay very
careful attention, and try


TO CAST ON STITCHES WITH THE FINGERS

    Material: About 2 yards four-fold Germantown wool.

    One pair bone knitting needles No. 6.

[Illustration: “Now, pay attention.”]


CUT 1

    Make slip knot about one-half yard from end of yarn.
    Draw it up on one knitting needle, holding yarn in
    position shown in this picture.


CUT 2

    Catch hold of the shorter end of yarn with the left
    hand, and hold hands in the positions shown in this
    picture.


CUT 3

    Turn the left hand around to the position shown in this
    picture. With the right hand push the needle farther
    through the loop on left thumb, and with the first
    finger of the right hand throw the yarn over the point
    of the needle.

[Illustration: PLATE 5—MOTION PICTURES SHOWING HOW TO CAST ON KNITTING
STITCHES WITH THE FINGERS. SEE DESCRIPTION, PAGE 150]


CUT 4

    Draw the yarn tight and


CUT 5

    bring the needle toward you through the loop on the
    thumb.


CUT 6

    Push the loop backward from the point of the needle.


CUT 7

    Pull the loop downward.

[Illustration: “Look out!”]


CUT 8

    Let go of the loop and catching hold of the end of yarn
    in the left hand with the fingers and thumb, draw the
    loop up tight against the needle.

[Illustration: “Try, try again!”]

[Illustration: “Will you two keep still?”]




CHAPTER XXIV

CROW SHAY HELPS KNIT


EVERYONE watched Mary Frances as she tried to follow Fairly Flew’s
instructions; but the little girl had to try several times before she
could do the exercise well.

“You didn’t get the knack of it at first,” said the Yarn Baby, “but you
do splendidly now.”

“She has had Knack in the hand all the time,” whispered Crow Shay to
Knit, who began to laugh.

Hearing Knit laugh, Knack began to laugh, too.

[Illustration: Knit and Knack laugh]

“Why, I can scarcely hold this needle still!” exclaimed Mary Frances,
and Knack and Knit stopped giggling.

“You made them laugh!” whispered the Yarn Baby to Crow Shay, but he
pretended not to hear.

[Illustration: “It is all your fault!”]

“The first work in knitting,” said Fairly Flew, “is the casting of
stitches or loops on one knitting needle. There are several different
ways of doing this.”

[Illustration: “The first work.”]

“Yes,” said the little girl, “I have seen Aunt Maria cast on stitches
with two knitting needles.”

[Illustration: “Yes, I see.”]

“You will learn that method later on,” Fairly Flew promised; “but next—”

She did not finish the sentence because Crow Shay was attracting
everybody’s attention by his funny antics. He couldn’t seem to keep
still, but kept hopping up and down on the table so hard that it made a
constant tap-tap-tap!

“Watch me, Knit,” he was whispering, “you’ll soon be surprised to see
me help you.” Then he began to giggle.

“The little tease!” exclaimed Fairly Flew. Then turning to Mary Frances
she continued: “I see that you have your needle well filled with
cast-on stitches. They look nice and even, and you could knit them off
quite easily when shown how to use the other needle; but before you
learn to take stitches off, I wish to tell you about another easy way
to cast on stitches.”

[Illustration: PLATE 6—MOTION PICTURES SHOWING HOW TO CAST ON KNITTING
STITCHES WITH A CROCHET HOOK. SEE DESCRIPTION, PAGE 155]


TO CAST ON STITCHES WITH A CROCHET HOOK[I]

(See picture on opposite page)

    Material: Germantown zephyr.

    One pair bone knitting needles No. 6, crochet hook No.
    3.

[Illustration: To cast on.]


CUT 1

    1. Make a slip knot in the end of the yarn and slip
    it on the knitting needle. Do not pull the slip knot
    very close to the needle. Hold slip knot with thumb and
    second finger of left hand and with right hand slip the
    crochet hook into the slip knot back of the knitting
    needle. Put hook under yarn and pull a loop through the
    slip knot. Still hold slip knot with thumb and first
    finger of left hand.


CUT 2

    2. Bring the crochet hook in front of the knitting
    needle; wrap, and draw a loop through the loop on the
    crochet hook.

[Illustration: With crochet hook.]


CUT 3

    3. With first finger of left hand throw the yarn back
    over point of knitting needle,


CUT 4

    and make another stitch with the crochet hook.

    Continue doing this until the number of stitches wanted
    are cast on the needle. Slip the last loop on the
    crochet hook over the point of the knitting needle.

“She got the knack of that very quickly,” said the Yarn Baby to Wooley
Ball.

“No wonder,” whispered Crow Shay. “I was there to help her.”

“Many people would find the crochet method easier than other methods,
but it is not to be preferred where the edges of garments must be
stretched,” Fairly Flew went on to explain. “It is not a good method to
use in setting up the bottom of a sweater, because the edge should be
very elastic; but if you are making a doll’s shawl, for instance, the
crocheted cast-on stitches would be all right.”

    “See that, Knit and Knack!
       You thought Crow Shay
     Wouldn’t be needed
       For many a day!”

Crow Shay whispered to the knitting needle twins, who only laughed at
him and clicked their heads together.

“Isn’t he funny?” said Knit.

“Isn’t he funny?” said Knack.

[Illustration: “I was there to help.”]

[Illustration: “Isn’t he funny?”]

    “Funny Sonny
     Cried on Monday,
     Played on Tuesday,
     Knit on Wednesday,
     Crowed on Thursday,
     Shayed on Friday,
     Smiled on Saturday,
     Laughed on Sunday,”

recited Crow Shay to them in a low voice.

“Say it out loud,” said Fairly Flew.

Crow Shay looked embarrassed, but he knew that he must do as the fairy
told him, so he repeated the lines, which set everyone laughing.

“He’s so full of mischief,” said Fairly Flew, “that sometimes he
doesn’t know what he is saying.”

Crow Shay began to look very solemn and wise, which made them all laugh
again; but they stopped very suddenly as Billy’s voice called:

“Mary Frances!”

[Illustration: Looked embarrassed]

[Illustration: “Say it out loud.”]

[Illustration: “I know what you wish to do”]




CHAPTER XXV

TO KNIT A STITCH


“GOODNESS, Billy, you made me jump!” exclaimed Mary Frances, running
downstairs to meet him.

[Illustration: “You made me jump!”]

“Sorry,” said Billy. “I couldn’t find you down here and guessed that
you’d be in the sewing room. What keeps you there so long?”

“Oh, I told you, Billy—I am practicing knitting!” Mary Frances replied.

“Well, it must be lots of fun,” Billy said. “It certainly keeps you
quiet enough. Come on, and have a game of tennis.”

Mary Frances went to find her hat and jacket.

[Illustration: To find her hat.]

“When I know how, I shall make myself a sweater,” she thought. “I
should like to make one for mother first though—a pink one trimmed
with gray.”

“Come on, Mary Frances,” called Billy, “aren’t you ready?”

“Coming,” cried Mary Frances, running out the door.

       *       *       *       *       *

In about an hour and a half she came back to the room. “Oh, I have been
so worried!” she exclaimed. “Dear Knitting and Crocheting People, I
forgot entirely to give Mary Marie her bottle.”

[Illustration: “Did you?”]

“I gave her her pacifier,” said Crow Shay.

“Oh, what a story!” cried Knit.

[Illustration: “Oh, what a story!”]

“Oh, what a story!” cried Knack.

“I am glad that he didn’t,” said Mary Frances. “I do not often let her
have if for fear it will spoil the shape of her pretty mouth. I must
run and give her her bottle now.”

“I thought the little Miss was joking,” Crow Shay said as soon as she
had gone. “I never heard of a baby taking a bottle if she was old
enough to go to school, did you?”

“Oh, keep still, Crow Shay,” whispered the Yarn Baby. “You know all
about it. You know that Mary Marie is only——”

[Illustration: “Keep still, Crow Shay.”]

Just then Mary Frances came back.

“Mary Marie was sound asleep,” she said, “so I didn’t disturb her. Now
I’ll work hard to learn the next lesson,” and she repeated the little
verse,

    “Fairy Fairly Flew,
     Please come, for I need you;”

and the fairy appeared.

“I’ve been waiting to be called,” she said settling quickly in the
doll’s rocker, “for you have such an important lesson to learn. Quickly
set up fifteen stitches on one knitting needle.”

[Illustration: “I’ve been waiting.”]

“Which method shall I use?” thought Mary Frances, picking up Knack. “I
believe I will use the first one I learned,” she decided, and soon had
the fifteen stitches ready. She broke off the short end of yarn which
was hanging from the needle.

“Now,” said Fairly Flew, “now, you are ready to learn how—


TO KNIT PLAIN

    Material: Knitting worsted or four-fold Germantown
    zephyr in any color.

    One pair bone knitting needles, No. 6, 7, or 8.

    With the fingers, cast about 15 stitches on one needle.
    Tie the short end of yarn to the long end in a single
    knot close to the needle. Cut off short end.

[Illustration: “No, you’ll knot!”]


CUT 1

    Take up the other knitting needle with the thumb and
    fingers of the right hand, and slip the point of the
    right-hand knitting needle into the first loop on the
    left-hand needle, holding work in the position shown
    in the picture. Let the point of the right-hand needle
    stick out beyond the loop about an inch.


CUT 2

    Now spread open the thumb and finger of the right hand,
    and slide the hand forward until you can lift the
    thread which is over your first finger over the point
    of the right needle.

[Illustration: “We’ll knit!”]


CUT 3

    Now slide the right hand back into the position shown
    in this picture, and put the first finger of your
    _left_ hand on the point of the right-hand needle, and
    push the right-hand needle back until the point is even
    with the left needle.

[Illustration: PLATE 7—MOTION PICTURES SHOWING HOW TO KNIT PLAIN

SEE DESCRIPTION, PAGE 162]


CUT 4

    Bring the point of the right-hand needle over the front
    of the left-hand needle. This carries a new loop on to
    the right-hand needle.


CUT 5

    Slide the right-hand needle to the point of the left
    needle.


CUT 6

    Slip the end loop on the left needle off the point of
    the left needle, holding back the other loops on the
    left needle with the finger and thumb.

    Continue to knit in this way until all the stitches are
    knitted off the left needle.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Now place the needle with the new stitches on, in
    the left hand. Do not knit the first stitch off the
    needle, but slip it off the needle without knitting.
    Always slip the first stitch on a row unless told to do
    otherwise.

[Illustration: “See me knit!”]


TO SLIP A STITCH

    Put the point of the right-hand needle through the
    first stitch, and slip it over the top of the left
    needle.

    Continue to knit plain across the row.

[Illustration: “Don’t brag!”]

[Illustration: She drew up the strings]




CHAPTER XXVI

MARY FRANCES REALLY KNITS


MARY FRANCES had so much trouble getting the knack of this lesson that
her fingers seemed like “all thumbs,” try as she would.

[Illustration: “You are nervous.”]

“You are a little nervous, my dear,” said Fairly Flew. “Do not get
discouraged. Some day you will laugh at yourself for having trouble in
doing this, because knitting will be as easy—what is very easy?” she
asked.

[Illustration: “Knitting will be easy.”]

“Billy says, ‘as easy as rolling out of bed,’” laughed Mary Frances.

“Well, ‘as easy as rolling out of bed,’” finished the fairy.

How Mary Frances wished that that time had come, or that the fairy
would offer her her magic needles.

[Illustration: Magic needles.]

“I cannot offer you my magic needles you know,” went on Fairly Flew;
“but I can help you learn the lesson. Just watch me closely.”

She pulled two tiny gold knitting needles from her pocket. The heads of
the needles sparkled so that Mary Frances thought they must be diamonds.

Then the fairy drew some fine yarn from her pocket and began to do the
lesson just as she had given the directions to Mary Frances.

“Now, watch me closely,” she said, “and take your needles and do
exactly as I do.”

Before Mary Frances realized it, she had fifteen nice rows of knitting
done.

[Illustration: “Isn’t that splendid!”]

“Isn’t that splendid!” exclaimed Fairly Flew. “Now you are ready to
learn—


HOW TO BIND OFF

(How to Finish Knitted Work)

    NOTE.—When first learning how to bind off work it is
    easier to use a crochet hook in the right hand in place
    of the knitting needle, as shown in the picture on page
    167.

    In doing this work make very loose stitches.

    1. Knit the first 2 stitches of the last row of work on
    to a No. 4 crochet hook.

    2. Slip the left needle into the first loop on the
    crochet hook and pull this stitch over the top of the
    hook, and over the stitch nearest the hook.

[Illustration: HOW TO BIND OFF]

    3. Knit another stitch, still using the crochet hook in
    place of the right-hand knitting needle.

    4. With the left-hand needle lift the first loop on the
    crochet needle over the stitch just made and over the
    hook of the crochet needle.

[Illustration: “I helped!”]

    5. Continue doing this until there is but one stitch
    on the crochet needle. Break off the yarn about 1 inch
    from the work, and pull it all the way through this
    last stitch.

[Illustration: “Look at proud Crow Shay.”]

Of course, Mary Frances did not find it difficult to follow these
directions, because she watched Fairly Flew do the work and made each
stitch just as the fairy made it.

“That is splendidly done,” said the fairy as Mary Frances broke off the
yarn and fastened the last stitch. “For the next lesson you will make
something for Mary Marie.”

“Oh, I do not see how I can wait until to-morrow to start!” exclaimed
Mary Frances.

“But you’d better not work any more now—besides, my time is up for
to-day,” said Fairly Flew. “It will not seem long until to-morrow,
because you’ll be asleep for all night, you know.”

So Mary Frances put away her work.

“Good-bye, dear friends,” she said as she went away.

[Illustration: “Good bye.”]

“Good-bye. We’ll all be ready and waiting to-morrow,” everybody
promised at once.

[Illustration: “Good bye.”]

[Illustration: OUR FRIENDS, TEDDY BEAR AND AIRMAN

FOR DIRECTIONS FOR MAKING KNITTED ARTICLES SHOWN IN THIS ILLUSTRATION
SEE

TEDDY BEAR SUIT—129 DOLL’S BEAN BAG—180 AVIATOR DOLL’S OUTFIT—196-197]




CHAPTER XXVII

DOING IT OVER AGAIN


AS soon as Mary Frances opened her eyes the next morning she thought of
the promised lesson.

“I’ll hurry and dress,” she whispered. “Perhaps I can start my lesson
before breakfast. I wonder if the Knitting People are awake yet?”

Soon she was dressed, and ran to the sewing room.

“Good morning,” everybody greeted her as she entered.

[Illustration: “Good morning.”]

This surprised her quite a little.

“Why, good morning, my dear friends,” she replied. “I thought maybe you
wouldn’t be awake yet. It is so early.”

[Illustration: “Good morning.”]

    “Give me a shake
       If I’m not awake
     Before anyone else
       Jumps into the cake,”

sang Crow Shay.

“Jumps into the cake!” exclaimed Mary Frances. “Why, what has that to
do with your waking up?”

“Oh, nothing,” answered Crow Shay, “only I couldn’t think of any other
word to rhyme.”

Then Mary Frances laughed and said the little magic verse,

    “Fairy Fairly Flew,
     Please come, for I need you.”

“Good morning,” Fairly Flew said; and before Mary Frances could reply,
she added, “How pleased we are to see you so bright and early because
you are so anxious to learn your lesson.”

[Illustration: “Give me a shake.”]

“And because I am so anxious to make something for my dolly,” said Mary
Frances.

[Illustration: “Jumps into the cake!”]

“Well, you may start right away,” and Fairly Flew began to give the
instructions for making—


DOLL’S KNITTED SHAWL

(See picture opposite page 72—color plate)

    Material: Four-fold pink Germantown zephyr.

    Needles: one pair No. 5 knitting needles, one crochet
    hook No. 3.

    1. Cast on 23 stitches. Knit plain until shawl is 14
    inches long; and bind off.

    2. Trim ends with fringe, cutting the strands of yarn
    each 4 inches long. Put 2 strands in every other stitch
    at ends of shawl and pull through with crochet hook.
    (See directions for making fringe, page 69.)

[Illustration]

Mary Frances set to work with great pleasure, and before Katie called
her to breakfast she had eight rows of knitting done.

After helping Katie to dry the breakfast dishes, she sat in the hammock
and did six more rows.

“Won’t Fairly Flew be surprised when she sees this!” she thought as she
started upstairs.

The fairy was waiting in the little rocker when she entered the room.

[Illustration: Waiting for her.]

[Illustration: Katie called her.]

“Oh!” she exclaimed, “isn’t that lovely! You have done some work all by
yourself.”

“Yes,” said Mary Frances, “I wanted to surprise you, but somehow it
seems to me that the rows I have just knitted do not look quite so even
as those I did when I was with you.”

“Let me look at them more closely,” said the fairy, and when Mary
Frances laid her work on the table she bent close over it.

“Oh, my dear!” she said in her tiny voice. “Oh, my dear, you have
dropped some stitches! See?” and she pointed to the loose threads.

Mary Frances picked up her work and stretched these places open. The
stitches ripped apart.

“My, I am so disappointed!” she exclaimed. “What shall I do?”

“You must pull out your needle and rip out all your stitches back to
the beginning of the row where you see your first mistake,” said the
fairy.

Try as she would, Mary Frances couldn’t keep the tears from coming to
her eyes as she ripped out the stitches which she had made with so much
pleasure.

[Illustration: “You dropped some stitches”]

[Illustration: Couldn’t keep back the tears.]

“Oh, see how wrinkled the yarn is!” she cried. “I guess it will look
awful when it is used again!”

“No,” said the fairy, “it will not. Why, many a grown person has
unraveled a whole sweater and used the yarn again.”

“I shouldn’t think used yarn would make anything very nice,” said Mary
Frances.

“Yes, it does, if it is steamed.”

“Why, how can it be steamed?” asked the little girl, wondering.

“To steam the crinkles out of used yarn, lay it in a towel. Place the
towel in a wire strainer or colander. Place the strainer for five
minutes over a kettle of boiling water, but not touching the water. Let
the yarn dry in the strainer with the towel open.”

“Isn’t that fine to know!” said Mary Frances. “Shall I go steam this?”
She held up the pink yarn.

[Illustration: “Can it be steamed?”]

“No,” replied the fairy. “That has been ripped so soon after making
that you will not have any trouble with it. Try, and see.”

[Illustration: “Place in a colander.”]

So Mary Frances started bravely to work again. When she had done the
seven rows which she had ripped out Fairly Flew said, “How well you
have done, little girl! Now, you may finish the shawl with my magic
needles.”

You can imagine, can’t you, just how pleased Mary Frances was when the
fairy’s golden diamond-headed needles finished the shawl in a minute?

[Illustration: Diamond-headed.]

All this time Crow Shay had watched with sparkling eyes everything that
happened.

Fairly Flew now turned to him and said, “You have been so very good,
Crow Shay, that you may make the fringe on this shawl.”

[Illustration: Kick the fringe.]

Mary Frances couldn’t help laughing to see the little fellow tumble
head foremost into the little shawl and kick the fringe on the ends in
less time than it would take to tell you how to do it.




CHAPTER XXVIII

DOLL’S KNITTED HOOD


“LOVELY s’awl,” laughed the pleased dolly, when Mary Frances tried the
little shawl on Mary Marie. “Nice warm st’etchy shawl,” as she wrapped
it close over her shoulders. She meant stretchy, you know.

[Illustration: “Nice warm st’ctchy shawl.”]

Mary Frances carried her into the sewing room, “to thank her kind
friends who taught her mamma to make it,” which pleased them all very
much.

[Illustration: To thank them.]

When Mary Frances started to take the shawl off, Mary Marie cried, “’Oo
tan’t hab my s’awl; I’ll be told,” so Mary Frances sat her on the table
with the shawl around her, and gave her her doll to play with.

“Mary M’rie needs a nice ’ittle bonnet, to wear wif ’iss s’awl,” said
Mary Marie, looking up after a minute. “Mary M’rie’s ears are told.”

“I will go get your little cap,” said Mary Frances, starting to go find
it.

“No, no, Mamma,” cried the doll-baby. “Don’t want tap. I want bonnet.
Teep ears warm,” and she began to rub her little ears.

Mary Frances laughed. “You can pull your cap down on your ears,
dearie,” she said.

“No,” said Fairly Flew, “what Mary Marie wants is a real little bonnet,
just as she says—one that will tie under her chin and cover her ears.
Yarn Baby has just been waiting to give you the rules for making—


DOLL’S KNITTED HOOD

(See picture opposite page 230—color plate)

    Materials: Two-fold pink and two-fold white Saxony wool.
    One pair knitting needles, No. 2.

    Directions:

    1. Cast on 55 stitches with pink wool.

    2. Knit plain for 4½ inches.

    3. Break off pink wool and tie on the white wool, and
    knit 4½ inches. Bind off the work.

[Illustration: Fold on A-B]

[Illustration: Sew A-C and B-D]


_To Form the Hood_

    1. Fold the strip together across the two colors along
    the line _a_ and _b_.

    2. Sew (overhand) with Saxony wool along edges _a_ _c_
    and _b_ _d_.

    3. Turn inside out to put seams on the inside.

    4. Now fold on the line where the two colors are
    joined, and overhand the colors together on the open
    edge.

    5. Thread a long-eyed needle with three-quarter yard
    narrow pink ribbon and sew with small basting stitches
    along the edge just overhanded—to use to tie cap.

[Illustration: To tie cap.]

    6. Fasten ribbon rosettes on each corner for trimming.

Fairly Flew’s magic needles lay on the table, but Mary Frances did not
like to use them without the fairy’s special permission. So she took
Knit and Knack up in her hand, and they did their very best to help
her, sliding into the stitches almost by themselves.

In fact, they did so well that it did not take Mary Frances long to
finish the little cap.

[Illustration: Cap finished.]

“Isn’t that boo’ful!” exclaimed Mary Marie, clapping her hands as Mary
Frances held it up to view. “Pit it on, Mamma. Please pit it on Mary
M’rie!”

“Wait until I put on the strings, dear,” said Mary Frances. “I have
just the right kind of ribbon in my little doll’s trunk.” And she went
to find it.

[Illustration: Right kind of ribbon.]

Very soon Mary Marie had on the beautiful soft warm hood.

“Oh, doesn’t she look sweet in that?” exclaimed Mary Frances, kissing
her.

“Ears nice and warm, Mamma. Mary M’rie s’eepy now.” And Mary Frances
carried her off to bed.

“T’ank ’oo all, berry much,” said Mary Marie, throwing kisses, as Mary
Frances stopped in the doorway for a minute.

[Illustration: “Tank ’oo all.”]




CHAPTER XXIX

WHAT’S A PURL?


WHEN Mary Frances came back, Crow Shay asked her a question.

“Little Miss,” he said, “what’s a purl?”

[Illustration: “What’s a purl?”]

“A pearl?” said Mary Frances, greatly puzzled by his asking such a
question. “A pearl is a precious stone found in oysters.”

“Oh, no; I beg your pardon,” said Crow Shay. “A purl is a precious
stitch found in knitting.”

“Is he crazy?” Mary Frances wondered.

“No,” laughed the fairy, “he isn’t crazy. He is right about this; it is
now time that you learn how to make ribbed work in knitting. This is
called purling. How would you like to learn to purl and, at the same
time, make a bean bag for Mary Marie?”

[Illustration: “No, he isn’t crazy.”]

“Oh, that would be splendid!” cried Mary Frances, very much pleased.

“All right, then,” said the Yarn Baby; “listen carefully, and you will
find out how to make a


DOLL’S KNITTED BEAN BAG

(See picture opposite page 168—color plate)

    Material: Four-fold red, white, and blue Germantown zephyr.
    Two steel knitting needles, No. 12.
    Bone crochet hook, No. 3.

    Directions:

    1. With red yarn, cast on 12 stitches.

    2. Knit 1 row across.

    3. The next row will be purled. Slip off the first
    stitch without knitting.

[Illustration: Doll’s Bean Bag.]


_How to Purl_

CUT 1

    Throw the yarn in front of the _right-hand_ needle
    by throwing it over the point of the needle just as
    if taking a knitting stitch, _but do not put the
    point of the needle into any stitch on the left-hand
    needle before throwing the yarn over the point of the
    right-hand needle_.

[Illustration: “Listen carefully.”]

[Illustration: PLATE 8—HOW TO PURL. SEE DESCRIPTION, PAGE 180]


CUT 2

    Now put the point of the right needle into the next
    stitch on the left needle pointing the right needle
    toward the base of the left thumb.


CUT 3

    Throw the yarn over the point of the right needle in
    just the same way as in plain knitting.

    Next, pull the right needle _back_ and slip it _under_
    the left needle. Slip the top stitch on the left needle
    off the point of the left needle. The yarn will then be
    in the right position for purling the next stitch.

[Illustration: Beneath stitch.]

    Continue to purl all the way across the row.

    4. Slip off the first stitch and plain knit off the
    other stitches in the next row.

    By this time you will notice that when you are purling
    you are doing the work on the wrong side.

[Illustration]

    5. Slip off the first stitch on the next row. After
    slipping off this stitch, throw the yarn in front of
    the right needle and purl across the row.

[Illustration: “Isn’t it pretty?”]

    6. Continue knitting and purling every other row until
    the piece of work is 2 inches long. Bind off. This
    forms one side of the bean bag.

    7. Make another piece like this for the other side,
    using the blue yarn.


_To Make the Bean Bag_

    1. Make a little bag of soft cotton cloth and partly
    fill it with rice.

[Illustration: Rice.]

    2. Lay the red and blue pieces together, backs facing
    each other and “ribs” running in the same direction.

    3. With the white yarn, crochet the edges together with
    single crochet, leaving one end open. Slip the cloth
    bag inside the knitted bag and finish crocheting it
    together.

[Illustration: Crochet edges together.]

Mary Frances found that purling seemed quite awkward to do at first,
but after she had done half a dozen rows, the stitches formed much more
easily. When she finished the red square she stopped to admire the
pretty even rows of ribs. Just as she finished putting the bean bag
together, the bell rang for luncheon.

“I’ll bring the rice back with me after lunch,” she said, “if Katie
will give it to me.”




CHAPTER XXX

DOLL’S SLEEVELESS SWEATER


WHEN she came back, Mary Frances had the rice; and she soon finished
the little bean bag.

“Won’t Mary Marie be delighted with this surprise?” she said. “I feel
almost like waking her up.”

“Oh, don’t do that,” said Fairly Flew, “because we will soon have
another surprise for her if you will work hard.”

[Illustration: “Another surprise.”]

“Indeed I will,” promised Mary Frances. “I wonder what it is?”

“Guess!” said Crow Shay.

[Illustration: “Guess!”]

“A—a wash rag?” guessed Mary Frances.

“No,” said Fairly Flew. “Guess again.”

“A—a stocking?” guessed Mary Frances again.

“Oh, no,” laughed Crow Shay,

    “It’s something better—
     It’s a sweater.”

[Illustration: “It’s a sweater.”]

“Is it?” cried Mary Frances. “Is it? Why, that’s just exactly what I’d
wish for most of all things!”

“It is,” answered Fairly Flew, “and this time Wooley Ball is going to
give the directions.”

“Oh, I am so glad!” exclaimed Mary Frances. “I have wondered and
wondered why she is so quiet.”

Everybody looked at Crow Shay. Crow Shay looked ashamed.

“I’ll tell you about it,” he said at length. “You see, I talked so much
that Wooley Ball made a bargain with me. She said that if I would talk
only half that I wanted to, she wouldn’t talk at all, and we’ve both
kept our bargain.”

Then everybody began to laugh. Wooley Ball laughed most heartily of all.

[Illustration: Wooley Ball laughed.]

“You see, it isn’t hard for me to keep the bargain,” she said,
“because, while I like to tell about yarns, I’m not much of a yarn
spinner. Still, if our Fairly Flew wishes, I shall feel honored to tell
how to make—


DOLL’S KNITTED SLEEVELESS SWEATER

(See frontispiece—color plate)

[Illustration: Blue floss and gray yarn.]

    Material: Turquoise blue double wool floss, and gray teazle yarn
      for trimming.
    2 Bone knitting needles No. 3, crochet hook No. 3.

    Directions:

    _To Knit the Back of the Sweater_

    1. Cast on 32 stitches and knit plain for 15 ribs. A
    rib is made by knitting a row across and a row back
    again. Two rows form a rib in knitting.

    2. To form the waist line, knit 2 stitches and purl 2
    stitches for 6 rows.

[Illustration: Fairly Flew.]

    3. Knit 15 more ribs plain. This will reach the
    shoulder of the sweater.

    4. _To Knit the Shoulder._—Knit 10 stitches, and slip
    them off on a safety pin. (See page 186.)

[Illustration]


_To Slip off Stitches Needed Later_

(See picture on page 185)

    In doing this work, point the safety-pin toward the
    last stitch on the right-hand needle, and slip it off
    the needle on to the pin. Slip the rest of the stitches
    in the same way. Clasp the safety-pin. Very large
    safety-pins are made for the purpose.

    5. Bind off the next 12 stitches to form back of neck.

    6. Knit 4 ribs on the remaining 10 stitches to form the
    shoulders. (See picture on page 187.)

    7. Now increase the number of stitches. Make 1 new
    stitch on every other rib (that is, on one row of every
    other rib). Add the extra stitch to the neck end of
    front of sweater.

[Illustration: Slip stitch.]


_To Increase or Add a Stitch in Knitting_

    Knit 1 stitch on the front thread of 1 stitch, and
    without slipping a stitch off the end of the left
    needle bring the right needle over the point of the
    left needle. Knit another stitch on the back thread
    of the same stitch. In doing this, point the needle
    through the back thread away from you. Slip top loop
    off left needle.

    8. Increase the number of stitches as explained in No.
    7 until you have 16 stitches on the knitting needle,
    and continue to knit in ribs without increasing until
    there are 20 ribs from the starting of the shoulder.

    9. Then knit 2 and purl 2 stitches for 6 rows.

    10. Then knit 15 ribs plain and bind off the work.

    11. To start making the other shoulder, unclasp safety
    pin and hold knitting needle pointing toward point of
    safety pin.

[Illustration: “Won’t she be surprised?”]

    Take 1 stitch at a time off the safety pin on to the
    knitting needle. _Fasten the wool at corner of neck._

    Then make other front like the one just finished.

[Illustration: To form armhole.]

    Sew fronts and back together along line a b, pinning a
    to a, and b to b. The space between a and a will form
    the armhole. (See frontispiece.)

[Illustration]


_To Make the Collar_

(See page 188.)

    1. With gray teazle yarn cast on 26 stitches, and knit
    2 ribs.

    2. Break off the gray yarn and tie on the blue yarn.

    3. Knit 8 ribs of blue.

    4. Knit 8 stitches. Slip them on to a safety pin.

[Illustration: Slip on safety pin.]

    5. Bind off 10 stitches for the neck, and on the other
    8 stitches knit 11 ribs of blue. Break off yarn.

    6. Join the gray yarn and knit 2 ribs. Bind off the
    work.

    7. Take the 8 stitches off the safety pin on to the
    knitting needle and make the other side of the collar
    in the same way. Sew the collar to the sweater with
    blue yarn.


_To Make the Tie_

    Crochet 15 chain stitches and hang a tassel to the end
    for trimming; or instead of making a tassel, crochet
    single crochet stitches over a little brass ring if you
    have one; or

    Wind the yarn around a lead pencil 8 times. Without
    breaking the yarn slip the ring thus formed off the
    pencil. (See picture p. 189.)

[Illustration: Wind on lead pencil]

    (_a_) Tie it together with sewing thread.

    (_b_) Make single crochet stitches over the ring until
    it is filled, and without breaking the yarn, make a
    chain of 15 stitches.

    Sew the chain to the sweater at the end of the collar.

    Make another tie in this same way.

[Illustration: THE COLLAR]

When the beautiful little sweater was finished, with the help of the
magic knitting needles, Mary Frances was too happy for words, and Mary
Marie danced up and down with joy.

“’Et Mary M’rie see herse’f in the glass!” she begged. “Please, Mamma,
’et her loot at et!”

[Illustration: Danced with joy.]

[Illustration: TO MAKE THE TIE]

So Mary Frances stood her before the doll’s bureau.

[Illustration: “Isn’t I tweet?”]

“Isn’t I tweet?” said the proud doll-baby, “I mean, isn’t it tweet?—I
mean, isn’t we tweet?” and set everyone laughing.

[Illustration: Everyone laughed.]

“Oh,” exclaimed Mary Frances, looking out of the window, “here comes
the postman. I hope he has a letter from mother.” And she ran to the
door.

[Illustration: “The very thing.”]




CHAPTER XXXI

GOOD NEWS


“LISTEN!” she said, coming back after a few moments. “Listen while I
read my letter:

[Illustration: “Dear Mary Frances.”]

    _Dear Mary Frances:_

    _How glad you will all be to hear that father is so
    much better that Aunt Maria and I are planning to bring
    him home some day next week._

    _What dear good children you and Billy have been, and
    how we have enjoyed your splendid cheerful letters._

[Illustration: Aunt Maria.]

    _I am pleased that you have been practicing on your
    crocheting lesson. It pleases Aunt Maria, too. Every
    girl should be able to crochet and knit. I wish I had
    been taught when I was little—but I had no Aunt Maria._

    _Now, my dear, be brave a little while longer and not
    too lonely, for the sake of your loving_

                                     _Mother and Father_.

“Now, isn’t that a lovely letter!” said Mary Frances, as she finished
reading.

[Illustration: “Lovely letter!”]

“Lovely letter!” said Crow Shay. “Lovely letter, but it means a
hurry-hurry to get through our lessons!”

Mary Frances looked at Fairly Flew.

“Yes,” the fairy acknowledged, “the Queen of all Fairies told us that
we must finish the lessons before your parents——”

“And aunt,” interrupted Crow Shay.

“Yes,” laughed Fairly Flew, “and aunt, come home.”

“Oh, dear,” cried Mary Frances, “I love my lessons so much, and yet I
do want my father and mother home.”

“Never mind,” said the fairy, “never mind; let us finish the lessons
as soon as we can; and afterward if you need me very much, and call me
with the magic rhyme when no real people can overhear us, I will come
sometimes to help you.”

[Illustration: “Never mind.”]

“Oh, will you?” exclaimed Mary Frances, drying her tears. “That is a
real comfort to think of.”

“Now, go take a walk,” continued Fairly Flew; “you have been indoors
long enough for to-day.”

“Take me walk, Mamma?” asked Mary Marie.

[Illustration: “Take me walk, Mamma?”]

Mary Frances looked at the fairy.

“Shall I take her?” she asked; “and may I leave her sweater on?”

“Take her, by all means,” answered the fairy; “and, if you wish, you
may leave her sweater on.”

“But suppose someone asks me who made it?” Mary Frances said.

“Just say that some dear friends of yours helped make it,” the fairy
told her.

“Will Mary Marie stay alive?” Mary Frances asked.

“The Queen of Fairies told me that she would be real while you are
learning to crochet and knit, except when any other person than
yourself looked at her. Then she will turn into a doll again.”

[Illustration: “She will turn into a doll.”]

“Oh, isn’t this wonderful!” exclaimed the little girl, putting on Mary
Marie’s cap. “I’ll try to take a walk where no one will notice us—and
I’ll come early for a lesson to-morrow. I love my lessons so much that
I never want to stop learning.”

[Illustration: “All work and no play.”]

    “All work, and no play
     Will make you dumb as me, Crow Shay,”

sang Crow Shay as Mary Frances went out.

[Illustration: Mary Frances went out.]




CHAPTER XXXII

THE BOY AVIATOR


THE next morning when Mary Frances went into the sewing room, Fairly
Flew was sitting in the rocker waiting for her.

[Illustration: Waiting for her.]

“Is there anything which you particularly would like to learn to make?”
she asked.

“Yes,” replied Mary Frances. “I would love to learn how to make an
outfit for the aviator doll in Billy’s airship.”

“Hurrah!” cried Crow Shay.

“Hurrah!” cried Knit.

“Hurrah!” cried Knack.

[Illustration: “Hurrah!”]

“Why are they so pleased?” asked Mary Frances.

“Because that is just what we had planned,” said Fairly Flew. “So
listen while I tell you how to make—


AVIATOR DOLL’S KNITTED HELMET

(See picture opposite page 168—color plate)

[Illustration]

    One pair knitting bone needles No. 3.

    Material: Olive drab or khaki color knitting worsted.

    Directions:

    1. Cast on 22 stitches.

    2. Knit plain 76 ribs (a rib is a row across and back).

    3. Bind off.

[Illustration: “Ready for war.”]


_To Make the Helmet_

    Fold it across the middle and sew (overhand) 2 edges
    together the length of the doll’s head in back with the
    yarn. Then sew front edges together for a short space
    under the chin.

[Illustration: “Or cold.”]


AVIATOR DOLL’S KNITTED WRISTLETS

[Illustration]

    Material: Olive drab wool.

    One pair No. 12 steel knitting needles.

    Directions:

    1. Cast on 18 stitches.

    2. Knit 1 stitch; purl 1 stitch.

    3. Continue knitting 1 stitch and purling 1 stitch
    until wristlets are 1¾ inches long.

    4. Fold edges together and sew up sides, leaving small
    opening close to one end for the thumb.

[Illustration: “See me knit.”]


AVIATOR DOLL’S KNITTED SLEEVELESS SWEATER

[Illustration]

    Material: Olive drab or khaki color knitting worsted.

    Knitting needles: One pair No. 3 bone, and one pair No.
    12 steel. One crochet hook No. 3.

[Illustration: “Look who’se here!”]

    Directions:

    1. With the steel needles cast on 36 stitches.

    2. Knit 2 and purl 2 for 12 rows.

    3. Next take one of the bone needles in your right hand
    and knit plain—all the stitches off the steel needle.
    Then knit 22 ribs with the bone needles.

    4. Knit 11 stitches and slip on to safety pin, in order
    to begin to form the neck.

    5. Bind off 14 stitches for neck.

    6. On the remaining 11 stitches knit 4 ribs for the
    shoulder.

    7. On this same needle cast on 14 stitches to form
    opposite side of neck. (See method of Casting On, pages
    260 and 261.)

    8. Slip the 11 stitches (see No. 6) and the 14 new
    stitches on another safety pin.

[Illustration: Slip on safety pin.]

    9. Take up the 11 stitches from the first safety pin
    (see No. 4) with a bone needle. Fasten wool at neck
    end; knit 4 ribs.

    10. Knit back to outer edge of sweater. Then slip the
    stitches off the other safety pin on to the same bone
    needle with the stitches made in direction No. 9.

    11. Make 22 ribs plain knit.

    12. Now take a steel needle in your right hand, and
    plain knit the stitches on the bone needle off on to
    the steel needle.

    13. Knit 2 and purl 2 for 12 rows and bind off the work.

    14. Sew sweater up under the arms, leaving about a
    3-inch opening for each arm.

    Sew the sweater together in same way as in making the
    Doll’s Knitted Sleeveless Sweater.

[Illustration: Sew together.]

    15. Put 1 row of single crochet stitches around the
    neck and armholes for a finish. Do not make the
    stitches too tight.

The fairy let Mary Frances use her magic needles, and the little outfit
was finished before three o’clock in the afternoon.

Mary Frances put the sweater and wristlets and helmet on the doll and
hid it away.

“I do not believe that Billy will miss it,” she told the Knitting and
Crocheting People; “and I do want to surprise him some day. He will be
so pleased.”

“That chap won’t take cold on any of his air trips, no matter how high
he goes,” remarked Crow Shay,

    “In coldest weather,
     Without a feather,
     He’ll feel like a bird
     Upon my word.”

“Oh, you’re a little parrot-bird yourself. Keep still, will you?”
whispered Wooley Ball, laughing.

[Illustration: “Keep still, will you?”]

“Perhaps Crow Shay is as pleased with this outfit as I am!” exclaimed
Mary Frances.

[Illustration: “We all are.”]

“We all are, I think,” said Fairly Flew. “It was a good idea to ask you
about what you wanted to learn to make. Think up something for our
next lesson.”

[Illustration: “Steater wif wooly tollar.”]

“Mamma,” whispered Mary Marie, “Mary M’rie wants a boo’ful steater wif
a wooly tollar.”

[Illustration: “Sports sweater.”]

“A sports sweater!” cried Mary Frances, softly. “The very thing!”

“A sports sweater! The sweet little thing doesn’t want much, does she?”
said Crow Shay, who overheard. “I could write all she doesn’t want on a
butterfly’s wing.” But no one paid any attention to him.

Mary Frances began to thank Fairly Flew for asking her about what she
wanted to make, but before she could do so the fairy was gone.

[Illustration: READY FOR CHURCH

FOR DIRECTIONS FOR MAKING KNITTED ARTICLES SHOWN IN THIS ILLUSTRATION
SEE

BEDROOM SLIPPERS—108 CROCHETED MITTENS—211 CROCHETED SOCKS—228

KNITTED MUFF—257 KNITTED BOA—257 CROCHETED NECKLACE—253]




CHAPTER XXXIII

MARY MARIE’S SPORTS SWEATER


SO the next day Mary Frances told Fairly Flew about what Mary Marie had
asked, and the fairy gave her directions for making—


DOLL’S KNITTED SPORTS SWEATER

(See picture opposite page 72—color plate)

    Material: Rose pink or turquoise blue wool floss, with
    gray Angora or teazle yarn for trimming.

    Two bone knitting needles No. 3. Two steel knitting
    needles No. 10. Bone crochet hook No. 2. Two small
    button molds.

[Illustration: Bone knitting needles.]

    Directions:

    This work is begun at the back of the sweater.

    1. With pink or blue yarn cast on 40 stitches.

    2. Knit plain for 15 ribs (a rib is a row across and
    back).

[Illustration: Mary Marie.]

    3. Knit the stitches off on to the steel needle.

    4. Knit 2, purl 2 for 8 rows, then knit off the
    stitches on a bone needle.

    5. Knit 5 ribs of 40 stitches.

    6. Then decrease 1 stitch on each end on every rib
    (every other row) until there are only 32 stitches on
    the needle.

[Illustration]


_To Decrease Stitches in Knitting_

    Put right needle through 2 stitches on left needle and
    knit off as 1 stitch.

[Illustration: “We made that!”]

    7. Knit ribs of 32 stitches until there are 16 ribs
    from the waist line.

    8. Knit 10 stitches on the next row, and slip them off
    on a safety pin.

    9. Bind off 12 stitches for back of neck. There will
    now be 10 stitches on the needle.

    10. Knit 4 ribs on these 10 stitches for shoulder.

[Illustration: “Aren’t we proud!”]


_To Make One Front_

    11. Cast on 8 stitches[J] on neck end for front—to form
    revers.

    12. Knit 6 ribs plain on the 18 stitches now on the
    needle.

    13. At under-arm edge increase by casting on 1 stitch
    on each rib until there are 24 stitches.

    14. Knit plain until there are 17 ribs from the front
    of the neck down.

    15. Take the stitches off on the steel needle and knit
    2, purl 2, for 8 rows.

    16. Knit the stitches off on to the bone needle and
    knit 15 ribs, and bind off.


_To Make Other Front_

    17. Slip the stitches from the safety pin on to a bone
    needle. Fasten wool at neck end, and make other front
    like the one just finished.

[Illustration: On safety pin.]


_To Make Sleeve_

    1. With bone needle, holding right side of sweater
    toward you, pick up 1 stitch on each rib around the
    armhole. (See page 202.)

    There should be 22 stitches on the needle, 11 on each
    side of center of shoulder. If you prefer, pick these
    stitches up with a crochet hook, and slip them on a
    knitting needle.

    2. On these 22 stitches, knit 10 ribs.

[Illustration: “Ten ribs!”]

    3. On each end of the eleventh rib from the shoulder,
    narrow by taking off 2 stitches as 1.

    4. Knit twelfth rib plain.

    5. Narrow on each end of the thirteenth row by taking
    off 2 stitches as 1.

    6. Continue to knit plain ribs until there are 19 ribs
    from the shoulder. Take off on to steel needle.

    7. Make 6 rows of knit 2, purl 2.

    8. Knit 1 rib plain.

    9. With wrong side of work toward you, fasten on the
    trimming wool. Knit 2 ribs, and bind off. (See cuffs,
    opposite page 72, color plate.)

    10. Make another sleeve like the one just finished.


_To Make the Collar_

[Illustration: To make collar.]

    1. With steel needles cast on 38 stitches of wool like
    body of sweater.

    2. Knit 6 ribs plain.

[Illustration: Knit 6 ribs.]

    3. Attach trimming yarn. Knit 4 ribs, increasing 1
    stitch at each end of needle every other row.

    4. Bind off.

    5. Hold right side of collar toward you. Pick up 1
    stitch on each rib on one front end of collar, and knit
    4 rows, increasing 1 stitch toward the corner on every
    other row. See picture below.

    6. Bind off.

    7. Do the same to the other end. Be sure to keep neck
    end even.

    8. Sew up mitered corners.

    9. Sew collar to neck of sweater.

    10. Sew sweater up under arms.

    11. Sew sleeves down to hand.


_To Make the Cover of the Buttons_

    1. With the trimming yarn, make 3 chain stitches.

    2. Put 8 single crochets in second chain stitch.

    3. Second row. Put 1 single crochet in first single
    crochet stitch (through both loops), 2 single crochets
    in second stitch, and so on to end of the row.

    4. Make 1 row without increasing and break off yarn.

    5. Thread a long-eyed needle with the yarn and sew
    cover over a button mold. Sew mold into place at waist
    of sweater.

    6. Make another button in the same way and sew it in
    place.


_To Make Loops for Buttons_

    7. Fasten floss to one edge of ribbed waist line of
    sweater, and crochet a chain of 7 stitches. Fasten last
    stitch at other edge of waist line with a slip stitch.
    Break off floss and fasten.

    Make another loop on other side at waist line to fasten
    the other button.

Even with the magic needles it took Mary Frances the whole morning to
make the little sweater; but it was beautiful when finished, and Mary
Marie surprised everybody by turning a somersault when Mary Frances had
put it on her.

[Illustration: Turning a somersault]

“Now, I p’ay tennis and doff!” she exclaimed. “Wish I had hat to doe
wif it!”

[Illustration: “What she does need!”]

“Just what she does need!” said Crow Shay, who greatly admired the
sweater. “Why not make her one?” and started to give the directions for
making a—


LITTLE CROCHETED HAT

(See frontispiece and picture opposite page 230—color plate)

[Illustration: Sport hat.]

    Material: To match any sweater.

    Bone crochet hook No. 3.

[Illustration: “A beauty!”]

    Directions:

    1. Make 3 chain stitches and join into a ring with slip
    stitch. Make 3 chains.

    2. Put 16 double crochets in the ring (counting the 3
    chains as if they were one double crochet) and join
    last double crochet stitch with the top of the 3 chain
    stitches.

[Illustration]

    3. Second row: Make 3 chains. Throw yarn over hook. Put
    hook under first 3 chains, in row below. Draw yarn
    through, and work off as a double crochet stitch. The
    next stitch is made in the same way: throw yarn over
    hook; put hook through under the whole double crochet
    stitch below and work off as a double crochet. (See
    picture above.)

[Illustration]

    The work will look like the picture A, on the side
    toward you; and like the picture B on the other side.
    (See page 208.)

    The ridged side is the outside of the hat.

    4. Put 2 double crochets around the next double crochet
    in the row below. Put 1 double crochet around the next
    stitch; 2 around the next—and continue in this way
    around the whole row. You should have 8 sections of 2
    double crochets together with 1 double crochet between
    them when row is finished. Join last double crochet
    with top of the 3 chains.

[Illustration: Make 3 chains.]

[Illustration: “Aren’t we smart?”]

    5. Third row: Make 3 chains. Make 1 double crochet
    around the 3 chains of the row below. Put 1 double
    crochet around the first double crochet in row below.
    Put 1 double crochet around the second double crochet.
    Put 2 double crochets around the third double crochet.
    Repeat this direction around the entire row, and join.

[Illustration: A B]

    6. Continue making rows in this way, increasing as
    shown in the diagram below:

[Illustration: “Row! Row! Row!”]

     1st row—16 double crochet (dc stands for double crochet).
     2d  row—2 dc 1 dc
     3d  row—2 dc 1 dc 1 dc
     4th row—2 dc 1 dc 1 dc 1 dc
     5th row—2 dc 1 dc 1 dc 1 dc 1 dc
     6th row—2 dc 1 dc 1 dc 1 dc 1 dc 1 dc
     7th row—2 dc 1 dc 1 dc 1 dc 1 dc 1 dc 1 dc
     8th row—2 dc 1 dc 1 dc 1 dc 1 dc 1 dc 1 dc 1 dc
     9th row—2 dc 1 dc 1 dc 1 dc 1 dc 1 dc 1 dc 1 dc 1 dc
    10th row—2 dc 1 dc 1 dc 1 dc 1 dc 1 dc 1 dc 1 dc 1 dc 1 dc

[Illustration: “Don’t be saucy!”]

    In the tenth row you will have 9 double crochets
    between 2 double crochets. Take care to have all the
    increases in a row from center out.

    7. Work the next 4 rows without increasing.

    8. On the next row, make 1 double crochet around the
    first stitch of the row below;

    1 double crochet around the next stitch;
    2 double crochets around the next stitch;

    and continue in this way to end of row. Join.

    9. Make 2 rows without increasing. Break off yarn and
    tie on the trimming yarn.

    10. Work 1 row of double crochet all around without
    increasing.

    11. Make 1 row of slip stitches around the edge of hat.

[Illustration: Slip a stitch.]


_To Make the Trimming_

    1. Cut 2 strands of trimming yarn and 2 strands of yarn
    the color of the hat, each 2 yards long.

    2. Lay them together, side by side. Take hold of one
    end of them with the right hand, and the other end with
    the left hand, and twist them in opposite directions.
    Or get some one else to twist one end while you twist
    the other in the opposite direction.

    3. Pull the twisted yarn “taut” or straight. Catch hold
    of twisted yarn in the middle and fold together taking
    all the ends firmly in one hand. Let go with the other
    hand. It will twist itself into a pretty cord.

[Illustration: Twist a pretty cord.]

    4. Fasten balls made of the two colors of yarn on the
    ends of the twisted yarn. Make them as you made the
    pom-poms on doll’s toque (page 95).

    5. Tie twisted cord around hat in a bow knot and sew in
    place on the right side. Turn up the left side of hat
    in a soft roll.

Crow Shay was wild with excitement when Mary Frances finished the
little hat and put it on Mary Marie’s head.

[Illustration: Crow Shay was wild.]

“Look at yourself in the glass now, Mary Marie,” he exclaimed. “You’re
the most beautiful——”

“Oh, don’t make her too vain!” said Mary Frances. “She has had so much
given to her that I’m afraid she will be spoiled as it is.”

“She needs one thing more, though,” said Crow Shay.

“What is that?” asked Mary Frances.

“Why, don’t you see how cold her hands look?” asked Crow Shay.

“Hands told!” said Mary Marie. “Hands told!”

“Oh, you little mischief!” laughed Mary Frances. “You little scamp! I
don’t think your hands are cold.”

[Illustration: “Hands told!”]

She felt of them. “They do not seem a bit cold,” she said.

[Illustration: “All the same.”]

“All the same,” said the Yarn Baby, “you would like to know how to make
her a pair of—


DOLL’S CROCHETED MITTENS[K]

(See pictures opposite pages 136 and 200—color plates)

    Material: Two-fold Saxony wool. Mercerized knitting cotton for
          trimming.
    Bone crochet needle No. 1.

    Directions:

    This work is begun at the top of the fingers.

    1. Make 3 chain stitches, and join in a ring with a
    slip stitch.

    2. Put 8 single crochets in the ring.

[Illustration]

    3. Put hook through both loops at top of stitches in
    row below, and work on around and around, adding an
    extra stitch in about every fifth stitch, until there
    are 18 stitches in the row.

[Illustration: “See my mittens?”]

    This will bring the work to the joint or crotch of the
    thumb.


_To Make Opening for the Thumb_

    4. Make 3 chain stitches, and continue to make single
    crochet stitches. Do not skip any stitches for the
    opening of the thumb, but make single crochet stitches
    all around on the 18 single crochet stitches, and in
    the 3 chain stitches—that will make 21 stitches.

[Illustration]

    5. Make another row of single crochet stitches on the
    21 stitches.

    6. Continue to work single crochet stitches, but on
    the next 2 rows, skip 1 stitch directly over the thumb
    opening.

    This finishes the hand of the mitten. The thumb will be
    made later.

[Illustration: “Aren’t they tiny?”]


_To Make Runner Spaces at Wrist_

    Make 3 chain stitches. Make a row of double crochet
    stitches.

[Illustration: “Look at these mittens.”]


_To Make Trimming Scallops_

    1. Put 1 single crochet stitch between the first and
    second double crochet stitches.

    2. Put 3 double crochets between the next 2 double
    crochets.

    3. Put 1 single crochet between next 2 double crochets,
    and 3 double crochets between the next 2. Continue to
    do this all around the top.

    4. Tie on the trimming cotton, and make 1 slip stitch
    in each double crochet of the scallops, with 2 chain
    stitches between each slip stitch.


_To Make the Thumb_

    1. Fasten yarn to the inner edge of the little opening.
    (See picture on page 212.)

    2. Make single crochet stitches in the stitches around
    the opening, except on the top part of the thumb, where
    you should put 1 double crochet. (That is, in the
    middle chain stitch. See No. 4 on page 212.)

    3. Continue with single crochets.

    4. Second row: Same as the first.

    5. Third row: Make single crochets in every other
    stitch, drawing the thumb down to a point. Break off
    the yarn and draw end with a zephyr needle into the
    inside of the thumb.

[Illustration: “So you won’t lose.”]


_To Make the Runner_

    With the trimming cotton, make a chain of 50 chain
    stitches, and run through the runner spaces as in
    making doll’s petticoat (page 90.)

[Illustration: Fasten together.]

    NOTE.—To help dolly from losing her mittens fasten them
    together.

Mary Marie no sooner had the mittens on than she ran to the door of the
room.

“Tum on, Mamma,” she said, “let’s doe for a walk.” Mary Frances caught
her up in her arms, and after a hurried good-bye to the Knitting and
Crocheting People, went out with her.

[Illustration: “Tum on, Mamma.”]

[Illustration: “Good bye!”]




CHAPTER XXXIV

HOME AGAIN


THE next morning Mary Frances was awakened early by a ring of the door
bell.

“I’ll run down to the door,” called Billy. “I am up and dressed. I
wonder who it can be?”

“All right!” called Mary Frances, slipping into her kimono.

“It’s a telegram from mother,” said Billy, coming upstairs.

“Oh, good! Do read it!” Mary Frances could scarcely wait to have it
opened.

[Illustration: Ring of the door bell.]

[Illustration: A telegram from Mother.]

    _Will be home Tuesday. Meet the 10 o’clock train. All
    well._

                                           _Mother._

read Billy. “Hurrah! That means that father is better than they even
hoped and that they can all come sooner than they expected.”

“Why!” he exclaimed suddenly, “to-day is Tuesday! Isn’t it fine that
the telegram came in good time!”

“Yes, indeed!” said Mary Frances. “And how happy I am.”

They hurried with their breakfast, and then went out to gather some
flowers to decorate the house.

They were at the station half an hour too early for the train, and
when at length it did pull in, you can imagine what a delightful time
everyone had.

“It seems a thousand years since I last saw you, Father dear,” said
Mary Frances, kissing him, “and a hundred since Mother and Aunt Maria
left; doesn’t it, Billy?”

“Well,” laughed Billy, “it seems an awfully long time, if not a
thousand years.”

“Do not talk too much to your father, children; he cannot bear too much
excitement,” warned Aunt Maria, as Billy led the way to the taxicab
which was to take them home.

[Illustration: “How happy I am!”]

[Illustration: Father dear.]

“You can tell the driver to stop at my house, Billy,” said the old
lady, who was quite nervous when riding in an automobile.

“Horseless carriages are so unnatural. It always seems to me like
riding behind a headless horse to ride in an automobile,” she added.

Of course the children had hard work to keep from laughing.

[Illustration: Billy carried her bags.]

When they came to her house, Billy carried her bags to the door and
rang the bell for her.

[Illustration: “Don’t sit in a draft.”]

“Tell your father to remember not to sit in a draft,” she called to
Billy as he ran down the path, “and tell Mary Frances to be ready for a
lesson in knitting next Thursday evening.”

“We heard, Billy,” said his father, as Billy jumped into the taxicab,
“didn’t we, daughter?”

“What have you done all the time, dear?” asked her mother.

“I’ll tell you some time, Mother,” said Mary Frances.

“Another secret?” asked her mother.

“I guess it is,” remarked Billy. “She has been as good and quiet as a
mouse most of the time up in the sewing room. She says she has been
practicing knitting. If she has been practicing all this while, she
must know a lot by now.”

[Illustration: Mother smiled.]

Her mother smiled and patted her hand, and by that time they were at
their own home.

[Illustration: Katie was at the door.]

Katie was at the door and was almost as glad as the children to see
their father and mother.

“It seems so good to have you all home,” she said, “that now life will
be worth the living of it.”

All tried to help make the invalid comfortable, and the children left
him to take a little nap before lunch.




CHAPTER XXXV

A GIFT FROM THE QUEEN OF FAIRIES


MARY FRANCES went to the sewing room.

[Illustration: “My dear friends.”]

“My dear friends,” she whispered. “My father and mother have come home,
and I’m so glad! But I shall be very sad if I am not to have any more
lessons with you.”

[Illustration: “You have learned enough.”]

“You have learned enough already,” said the Yarn Baby, “to make almost
anything if you have the directions.”

“Do you really think that?” asked Mary Frances in surprise.

    “It is most certainly quite true
       That you know more
     Than you think you do,”

said Crow Shay solemnly. “That’s more than can be said of most people,”
he added, after a pause.

“But I haven’t any directions,” sighed Mary Frances.

[Illustration: Sang Crow Shay.]

    “If I were you,
       If I were you,
     I’d call the fairy,
       Fairly Flew.”

sang Crow Shay, and Mary Frances took the hint.

[Illustration: Fairly Flew came.]

When the fairy Fairly Flew came at the call of the rhyme, she brought a
little satchel in her hands. It was not much larger than Mary Frances’
thimble.

“How do you do this morning, little Miss Mary Frances?” she asked.
“I’ve been waiting to be called, for I have a present for you from the
Queen of All Fairies.”

“Oh!” gasped Mary Frances, “for me?”

“Yes, in my satchel,” said the fairy.

“It cannot be anything for my dolls,” thought Mary Frances, “because
the satchel is too little to hold them.”

Then the fairy took a tiny key from her pocket and unlocked the
satchel. She opened it and began to pull a paper out. It was such a
thin strong paper that before long the fairy had unrolled yards of it
out of the little satchel into a pile on the table.

“Read it,” she said; and when Mary Frances lifted the end, she saw that
on it were written directions for making all kinds of things for dolls,
and for people, too.

[Illustration: “How wonderful!”]

“Oh,” she cried, “the Queen of Fairies couldn’t have pleased me better!
What a lot of wonderful things I can make now. Please thank her for me,
Fairly Flew.”

“That I shall,” said the fairy. “But wait—I have not yet given you all
that is in the bag. Here are some magic needles just like mine—for a
little girl who tried and tried again, and kept on trying.”

[Illustration: Needle-of-Don’t-have-to-Try.]

“Oh, like the Needle-of-Don’t-Have-to-Try!” exclaimed Mary Frances.
“How wonderful! Please, please, tell the Queen of All Fairies that I
thank her more than I can tell her.”

“Do you know what would please her more than anything else?” asked
Fairly Flew.

“No,” Mary Frances said. “Will you please tell me what it is?”

“To tell other little girls how to do the things you have just learned
to do,” said the fairy.

“How perfectly delightful!” exclaimed Mary Frances. “I can get the
girls to form a knitting club, can’t I?”

“Yes,” said the fairy, “get all your little friends to join, and make
many of the pretty things that this paper explains about.”

“How I wish I could tell my mother about our lessons,” said Mary
Frances.

“You may tell her. The Queen of Fairies sent word that you might do so
if you asked when the paper was——”

[Illustration: Knitting Twins fell down.]

Suddenly the fairy disappeared. The Knitting Twins fell down. Wooley
Ball and the Yarn Baby fell over on their sides.

[Illustration: Wooley Ball fell over.]

“Oh!” cried Mary Frances; then she looked around and saw her mother
standing in the door.

“Oh, Mother dear, come in,” she cried. “The most wonderful thing has
happened since you’ve been away!” And she told about the crocheting and
knitting lessons, and the gifts from the Queen of All Fairies.

“Wasn’t it lovely!” exclaimed her mother. “I am so glad! Just wait a
minute,” and she went out of the sewing room.

Very soon she was back, carrying a long package which she handed to the
little girl.

[Illustration: “A present from us.”]

“A present from father and me,” she said.

[Illustration: A wonderful infant.]

Mary Frances opened the package and lifted out a wonderful infant doll
which could open and shut its eyes and could cry when lifted on its
side.

“Oh, how dear!” cried Mary Frances. “Nothing could please me so much. I
wonder if the Queen of All Fairies knew you were bringing it? There are
directions on this paper for making an infant’s outfit.”

“Perhaps she did,” said her mother. “Perhaps she planned the directions
with this in mind.”

“Aren’t fairies and mothers wonderful people?” laughed Mary Frances,
hugging her mother and the new doll at once.

“Not any more so than good little daughters,” said her mother, kissing
her.

“Now, I must go to father,” she added. “Lunch will be ready in a short
time.”

[Illustration: Mary Frances]




CHAPTER XXXVI

THE MAGIC PAPER


MARY FRANCES carried her new dolly over into the playroom and laid her
down on the little bed by Mary Marie. Then she returned to the sewing
room.

[Illustration: The new dolly.]

[Illustration: “Without my dear friends.”]

“It seems lonesome without my dear friends,” she thought, “but I
believe they will all come to life again if I really need them. I
couldn’t expect to keep Fairly Flew all the time, for many other little
girls will need her.”

       *       *       *       *       *

I wish I could tell you about the good times she had making the
garments and gifts which were told about on the fairy’s paper; how Mary
Marie and the new baby came to life when Mary Frances was following
baby, and petted it, and held it in her lap even though it was nearly
as big as herself; how pleased Billy was with his airship doll; how
surprised and delighted and proud Aunt Maria was when she found out how
much Mary Frances knew; how Mary Frances did form a Knitting Club and
how the girls and a few boys made many, many useful garments for people
who needed them—but that would take another book as long as this one.

[Illustration: Proud Aunt Maria]

But I can give you the directions which were on the paper that the
Queen of All Fairies sent her by Fairly Flew, and you will find them in
the next chapter.

[Illustration: Mary Frances told me.]

Mary Frances told me this whole story herself, and asked me to write
this book so that you who read it may have some such pleasure as she
had in learning how to crochet and knit.




CHAPTER XXXVII

THE MAGIC PAPER (CONTINUED)


THESE are the instructions which were found on the paper which the
Queen of All Fairies sent to Mary Frances by the fairy, Fairly Flew.


INSTRUCTIONS

    NOTE TO BEGINNERS: Before attempting to make any of the
    following articles, make those given in the story part
    of this book.

    The articles that follow need not be made in the order
    given.


ABBREVIATIONS USED IN CROCHETING AND KNITTING

    When you look at the directions usually given for
    making crocheted and knitted articles you will find
    the names of the stitches abbreviated. Although
    _abbreviations are not used in this book_, it is well
    to know those in the following list:

    sc.         single crochet
    dc.         double crochet
    tr.c.       treble crochet
    sl.st.      slip stitch
    ch.st.      chain stitch
    st.         stitch
    k           knit
    *——*        repeat directions between stars

    NOTE.—In order to become familiar with these
    abbreviations—think of single crochet as “sc.”, and of
    double crochet as “dc.” Instead of using the words,
    use the letters when you read the directions. Say “2
    s-c’s” or “3 d-c’s”; not 2 single crochets, or 3 double
    crochets.


TREBLE CROCHET

    In making Treble Crochet make about 15 chain stitches.
    Skip 3 chains. Wrap the yarn around the needle _twice_,
    before putting hook through the chain stitch. Wrap, and
    draw yarn through chain stitch. Wrap, and draw yarn
    through 2 loops. Wrap, and draw yarn through 2 loops.
    Wrap, and draw through 2 loops.

[Illustration]


INFANT DOLL’S CROCHETED SOCKS

(See pictures opposite pages 136 and 200—color plates)

    Material: Three-fold Saxony wool. Pink or blue
    (mercerized) silk for trimming. Bone crochet hook No. 2.

    Directions:

    The work is begun with the ankle part.

    1. Chain 15; that is, make 15 chain stitches.

    2. Skip 1 chain and put 1 single crochet in each of the
    14 stitches. Chain 1 to use in turning.

    3. Taking the back thread only, make 1 single crochet
    in each of the 14 single crochets. The two rows just
    made will form a rib. This kind of rib is called
    “slipper stitch.” Make 1 chain in turning.

    4. Make 2 more ribs like the one just made. Make 1
    chain in turning.

    5. Make 8 single crochet and 1 chain stitch.

    Make 8 single crochet. These two rows of single crochet
    will form a shorter rib. Make 1 chain stitch.

    6. Make 8 more ribs on the 8 stitches.

    7. Join the last row of stitches with 8 of the first
    chain stitches made, using slip stitch.


    To Form the Foot:

    8. Put 1 single crochet in each stitch around the
    bottom of the part just made, taking up both threads.

    9. Make 4 more rows.

    10. Fold sock together from toe to back, and crochet
    together with slip stitch.


    To Make the Scallops:

    1. Fasten the wool into the top of the sock at the
    back, and make 1 single crochet.

    2. Put 4 double crochets in the top of the next rib.

    3. Put 1 single crochet in the top of the next rib.

    4. Repeat No. 2 and 3 around the top of the sock. Break
    wool and fasten.

    5. Fasten the trimming silk into the top of the scallop
    at the back of the sock. Make 1 single crochet.

    6. Make 5 double crochets in the single crochet stitch
    between the scallops of wool.

    7. Repeat No. 5 and 6 around top of sock. Fasten the
    silk.


    To Make the Runner.—With the silk make about 35 chain
    stitches. Run these through the top of the sock at the
    bottom of the white scallops and fasten a small tassel
    on each end of the runner.

    For trimming, thread a sewing needle with the pink silk
    and make 4 cross stitches on the center rib. Make 1
    cross stitch on each side of the second cross stitch
    from the top cross stitch.


INFANT DOLL’S CROCHETED CAP

(See picture opposite page 136)

[Illustration]

    Material: Three-fold pink or white Saxony, with
    three-fold deep pink Saxony for trimming. Bone crochet
    hook No. 2.

    Directions:

    1. Chain 3; that is, make 3 chain stitches. Join in a
    ring with slip stitch.

    2. Chain 3, and make 16 double crochets in the ring.
    Join last double crochet with slip stitch to the top
    stitch of the 3 chain stitches. This makes the first
    row.

    3. Second row: Chain 3. Make 2 double crochets in each
    stitch of first row, taking back thread (back loop of
    stitch) only. Join.

    4. Third row: Chain 3, and make 1 double crochet in the
    first stitch of the row below. Make 2 double crochets
    in the second stitch. Continue to do this to end of
    row. Join.

    5. Fourth row: Chain 3 and make 2 double in every third
    stitch. (Make 1 double crochet in the other stitches.)
    Join.

    6. Fifth row: Make 2 double crochets in every fourth
    stitch.

    7. Sixth row: Make 1 double crochet in each stitch of
    fifth row. Break off the yarn and fasten end.

    8. Seventh row: In the ninth stitch from joining,
    fasten yarn and make 3 chain stitches.

    9. Put 1 double crochet in each stitch of row below,
    leaving 16 stitches without any stitches taken in them.
    That is, leave 8 stitches on each side of the joining.
    This will be the back of the neck. Break off and fasten
    yarn.

    10. Make 7 rows (in all) putting 1 double crochet in
    each stitch of row below. Break off wool and fasten at
    end of each row.


    To Make Trimming Bands:

    1. Hold the inside of the cap toward you, and fasten
    the trimming wool at the right-hand corner.

    2. Make 3 chains. Put 1 double crochet in each stitch
    all around the cap. Join. Make 3 more rows like this.

    Fold the band back against the face and up around the
    neck of the cap, folding the extra fulness at the
    corners into a mitered shape. Sew in place with a
    long-eyed needle threaded with pink wool, and fasten
    rosettes and tie-ribbons at the sides.


INFANT DOLL’S CROCHETED SACQUE NO. 1[L]

    Material: Pink, or light blue, or white, four-fold
    Saxony wool. Bone crochet hook, No. 2.


    Directions:

    This work is commenced at the neck.

    1. Chain 50; that is, make 50 chain stitches.

    2. Make 11 double crochets.

    3. Put 2 double crochets in the twelfth chain stitch.

    4. Make 12 double crochets.

    5. Put 3 double crochets in the thirteenth chain stitch.

    6. Make 12 double crochets.

    7. Put 2 double crochets in the next chain stitch.

    8. Make 11 double crochets. Break off yarn and fasten
    end. Do not turn the work.

    9. Second row: Attach yarn at right-hand end.

[Illustration]


TO ATTACH NEW YARN

    Put the needle through the stitch and put a slip knot
    on the hook. Draw the slip knot through the stitch; or,
    thread a zephyr needle with the new yarn and run it
    into the loose end on the work; or, twist the two ends
    of yarn together.

[Illustration]

    10. Chain 2. Taking the back loop only, make 12 double
    crochets. Put 3 double crochets in the next stitch.

    11. Make 1 double crochet in each stitch until you
    reach the cluster of 3 double crochets. Put three
    double crochets in the middle double crochet of the
    cluster.

    12. Make 1 double crochet in each stitch until the
    cluster of 2 double crochets is reached. Put 3 double
    crochets in the first of the 2 double crochets. Put 1
    double crochet in each stitch to end of row. Break off
    yarn, and fasten end.

    13. Third row: Attach yarn. Chain 2. Make 1 double
    crochet in each stitch except in middle stitch of
    clusters. Put 3 double crochets in the middle stitch of
    each cluster. Break off yarn and fasten.

    14. Fourth and fifth rows: follow direction No. 13.

    15. Sixth row: Same as fifth row, except that in
    starting, 2 double crochets are put into the first
    stitch; 2 double crochets are also put into the last
    stitch.

    16. Seventh row: Chain 2. Turn the work.

    17. Putting hook under both threads, make 1 double
    crochet in the next stitch. Chain 1. Skip 1 stitch. Put
    1 double crochet in the next stitch.


    To Form the Armhole:

    18. Keep on in this way (see No. 17) until there are
    7 double crochets. Make 12 chain stitches. Count 7
    stitches from the middle stitch (counting the middle
    stitch) in the first cluster of double crochets in the
    sixth row. Put 1 double crochet in the eighth stitch
    beyond the middle stitch of the cluster.

    19. Continue according to direction No. 17.

    20. Put 2 double crochets, with 1 chain stitch between,
    in the middle stitch of the cluster of double crochet
    in the middle of the back of sacque.

    Continue according to direction No. 17, until within 7
    stitches from middle stitch of last cluster of double
    crochet in sixth row. Make 12 chain stitches and form
    other armhole. Continue by direction No. 17 to end of
    row.

    21. Eighth row: Follow direction Nos. 16 and 17,
    putting 2 double crochets in the first and the last
    stitches of the row in order to widen the front. The
    double crochets are put under _two_ threads in the
    chain stitches of the row just made.

    22. Ninth, tenth, eleventh, twelfth, thirteenth and
    fourteenth rows: Like eighth row. Break off yarn and
    fasten end.


    To Make the Sleeve:

    1. Attach yarn to middle chain stitch underarm. Chain
    2. Put double crochets all round the armhole. Join last
    stitch to chain with a slip stitch.

    2. Next row. Chain 2. Put 1 double crochet in the next
    stitch. Chain 1. Put 1 double crochet in next stitch.
    Continue around row and join first and last stitches.

    3. Continue direction No. 2 for 3 more rows. Narrow
    in the next 4 rows by omitting the chain between the
    double crochet every other stitch.

    4. Chain 1. Put a row of single crochet around end of
    sleeve. Join.

    5. Putting hook under back thread, make another row of
    single crochet. Break off yarn and fasten end.


    To Make the Trimming:

    The sacque in the picture is trimmed with a wool and
    silk Saxony yarn. It may be trimmed with the yarn used
    for the sacque.

    1. At the left corner of the neck attach the yarn. Make
    slip stitches down left front to the first open space.

    2. In the space, put 2 double crochets, and 1 chain,
    and 2 double crochets.

    3. Make 1 single crochet in the next space.

    4. Continue direction No. 2 to corner of sacque.

    5. In the corner, put 3 double crochets, and 1 chain,
    and 3 double crochets.

    6. Continue to make scallops in this way all around
    sacque, finishing edge of yoke part with single
    crochets as in direction No. 1 above.

    Finish sacque at neck by drawing a ribbon runner under
    every other stitch.

[Illustration: FLOWERS FOR MOTHER

FOR DIRECTIONS FOR MAKING KNITTED ARTICLES SHOWN IN THIS ILLUSTRATION
SEE

LITTLE CROCHETED HAT—206 FLOWER BASKET—246 KNITTED HOOD—176

KNITTED SILK SWEATER—259 BABY’S CROCHETED BALL—252]

[Illustration: INFANT DOLL’S CROCHETED SACQUE NO. 2]

[Illustration:

    CUT 1
    CUT 2
    CUT 3
    CUT 4

DETAILS OF AFGHAN STITCH]

INFANT DOLL’S CROCHETED SACQUE NO. 2.[M]

(See picture opposite page 136)

    Material: Three-fold pink Saxony wool. Bone crochet
    needle No. 3. This needle should be a long even one,
    because the yoke of the sacque is made with


AFGHAN STITCH

    Before beginning the sacque, practice making afghan
    stitch with four-fold Germantown wool.

    Make 9 chain stitches. Pull a loop through _each_
    stitch of the chain except the one next the needle.
    That is, skip one chain. See Cut 1, page 233.

    Pull a loop through the loop nearest the hook. Cut 2.

    Pull a loop through the next two loops nearest the
    hook. Continue to pull a loop through two loops in this
    way (Cut 3) until only one loop remains on the needle.

    You will now notice the long straight upright loops on
    the front, or the right side, of your work. Cut 4.

    Put the hook under the nearest long loop on the _front_
    of the row of stitches just made, and pull a loop
    through. Cut 4. Continue to pull loops through the
    entire row in this way, and take the loops off the
    needle in the same way as they were pulled through the
    stitches in Cuts 2 and 3.


    Directions for Making the Sacque:

    Begin the work at back of yoke which is made with
    afghan stitch.

    1. Chain 30; that is, make 30 chain stitches.

    2. Keeping the last chain stitch on the hook, pull a
    loop through each stitch of the chain (except the one
    next to the needle) making 30 loops on the needle.

    3. To take the stitches off, throw the yarn over the
    hook, pull hook through first loop. Throw yarn over the
    hook. Pull hook through 2 loops.

    4. Continue to pull hook through 2 loops until but one
    loop remains on needle.

    5. Pull a loop through each long loop (do not count the
    chain stitches on the edge as a long loop), leaving
    each on the needle. Do not turn the work, always work
    on the right side.

    6. Repeat direction No. 3 and No. 4.

    7. Make 10 rows of afghan stitch.

    8. On the next row make loops in 10 stitches only—to
    form shoulder.

    9. Make 6 rows of 10 stitches.

    10. Now add 1 stitch, at the neck end only, on each row
    until there are 15 stitches.

    To add a stitch.—Draw up a loop through the top thread
    between the loops of the row below. See “A” in Cut 4,
    page 233.

    11. Continue to work on these 15 stitches until there
    are 10 rows, or 26 rows from the starting of the yoke.

    12. To make strip down the front.—Make slip stitch in
    9 loops. Then work 13 rows of afghan stitches on the
    remaining 6 stitches. Finish end of strip with 1 row of
    slip stitches.

    13. To make other side.—Fasten yarn at right corner of
    back of neck. Make slip stitches in 10 stitches, and
    make 6 rows of afghan stitches on the other 10 stitches.

    14. Increase on this side by making the extra loop
    between the first and second stitches until there are
    15 stitches.

    15. Work on the 15 stitches until there are 26 rows
    from the starting of the back yoke.

    16. Then make front strip of 13 rows on the first 6
    stitches, and finish strip like on other side.

    17. Make slip stitches all around yoke.

    18. Fasten yarn at one lower corner of yoke, back.
    Chain 8 and fasten end stitch to one lower corner of
    yoke, front, for armhole.

    19. Do the same for other armhole.


    To Make Body of Sacque:

    Fasten yarn at left side corner of yoke leaving about a
    3-inch end hanging and work across bottom of yoke and
    across the under arm chain stitch in this way:

[Illustration]

    1. Put 1 slip stitch in first stitch.

    2. Make 3 chain stitches.

    3. Put 1 double crochet in same stitch with the slip
    stitch.

    4. Chain 2.

    5. Put 2 double crochets in same stitch.

    6. Skip 2 stitches on bottom of yoke, and put 1 double
    crochet, 1 chain stitch, 2 double crochets in the next
    stitch. Continue in this way to end of yoke on right
    side. Break off yarn about 3 inches from the work and
    pull through the last stitch. The ends are used later
    to fasten the body of the sacque to the front strips.

    7. Second row: Fasten yarn in the middle of the first
    scallop on the left side, leaving the end hanging.
    Chain 3. Put 1 double crochet in same stitch. Chain 2.
    Put 2 double crochets in same stitch, and continue to
    other end of yoke, making a scallop in the middle of
    each scallop.

    8. Continue in this way until the body is as long as
    the strip in front.

    9. Thread a long-eyed needle with the end of yarn
    hanging from the first scallops, and catch it to the
    front strip with an over-and-over stitch. Cut off yarn.

    Continue to fasten fronts to scallops in this way until
    they are fastened down the full length of the fronts.


    To Make the Sleeve:

    1. Fasten yarn at corner of armhole. Chain 3, and make
    a scallop (as in body part of sacque) in first stitch.

    2. Skip 4 of the slip stitches on the edge. Make a
    scallop in the next stitch. Continue in this way around
    the armhole.

    3. Join last and first scallop with slip stitch.

    4. Chain 3 and make another round of scallops and join.

    5. Continue to make rounds of scallops until there are
    7 rows.

    6. On the next row, chain 3. Put 2 double crochets in
    the middle of each scallop in the row below.

    7. Next row: Chain 3. Put 1 double crochet in each
    double crochet of row below. Break off and fasten yarn.

    Make other sleeve like this one.


    To Make Bands for Sleeves:

    1. Chain 6, and make a strip of afghan stitches 14 rows
    long.

    2. Finish all around strip with slip stitch.

    3. Sew ends of band together, and slip it over the end
    of the sleeve, putting the seam to the seam of the
    sleeve, and sew in place with end of pink wool.

    Trimming.—With pink silk, make a row of slip stitches
    all around the edge of the sacque, and ends of the
    sleeves.

    Thread a zephyr needle with two threads of the silk,
    and make cross stitches on the front strips, and around
    the strips at ends of sleeves.

    Fasten pink narrow ribbons at neck to tie.


INFANT DOLL’S CROCHETED CAPE AND HOOD[N]

(See picture opposite page 136)

    Material: Two-fold Saxony wool. Crochet silk
    (mercerized) for trimming. Bone crochet needle, No. 2.


    Directions:

    To Make the Hood.

    1. With the Saxony, make 3 chain stitches.

    2. Join them in a ring with a slip stitch.

    3. Make 3 chain stitches, and make 16 double crochets
    in the ring.

    4. Join the last double crochet with the top of the 3
    chain stitches with a slip stitch. This makes the first
    row.

    5. Second row: Make 3 chain stitches and put 2 double
    crochets in each double crochet of the first row. In
    making this garment, take up back loop of the stitch
    only. Join as in direction No. 4 (bottom of page 236).

    6. Third row: Chain 3; that is, make 3 chain stitches.
    Put 1 double crochet in the first double crochet in the
    row below. Put 2 double crochets in the second double
    crochet. Continue in this way to the end of the row,
    and join as in direction No. 4.

[Illustration: CAPE AND HOOD]

    7. Fourth row: Chain 3 and put 2 double crochets in
    every third stitch. (Put 1 double crochet in the
    stitches between.) Do this to the end of the row and
    join.

    8. Fifth row: Chain 3, and put 2 double crochets in
    every fourth stitch. Join.

    9. Sixth row: Chain 3 and put 1 double crochet in each
    double crochet of the row below. Join and break off and
    fasten the yarn.

    10. Seventh row: Fasten end of wool at the ninth stitch
    and make 3 chains. Put 1 double crochet in each stitch
    of row below, leaving 16 stitches without any stitches
    taken in them; that is, leave 8 stitches on each side
    of the joining. This will be the back of the neck.

    11. Make 8 rows in all, putting 1 double crochet in
    each double crochet of row below, breaking off and
    fastening the yarn at end of each row. Begin the new
    row each time at the right side of the cap.

    There is a turned-back facing around the face of the
    doll.


    To Make the Facing:

    Holding the wrong side of the cap toward you, make 4
    rows of double crochet in the same way as in directions
    Nos. 10 and 11. Nothing more is to be done to this
    facing until after the cape is made.


TO MAKE THE CAPE

    This work is all done on the right side, holding cap
    toward you.

    1. Starting at the right-hand corner of the neck, make
    1 row of double crochet along the bottom edge of the
    cap. Break off and fasten yarn.

    2. Second row: Fasten yarn at right end and make this
    row of double crochet, putting 3 double crochets in the
    fifteenth stitch from each end. These increases make
    the fulness over the shoulders.

    3. Third row: Make this row of double crochet, putting
    3 double crochets in the middle stitch of the increases
    in direction No. 2.

    4. Fourth row: Make in same way, increasing as in No.
    3. Also increase by making 2 double crochets in each of
    2 stitches in the middle of the back.

    5. Fifth and sixth rows: Same as fourth row.

    6. Seventh row: This row is increased in the shoulders
    and middle of back in the same way as before, but more
    fulness is given by making 2 double crochets in the 2
    middle stitches between the shoulder and the back on
    each side.

    7. The eighth row is made in the same way as the
    seventh row.

    8. Make 9 rows without increasing.

    9. To fasten the loose ends of wool, thread them into a
    long-eyed needle and run the ends back into the work.

    10. Starting at the neck at the left side, holding the
    outside of cape toward you, make single crochets in the
    ends of the first 2 rows of double crochet.

    11. Make double crochet all around the cape except at
    the corners, where you will put 3 double crochets.

    12. When you reach the first 2 rows on the right-hand
    side of the cape at neck, make single crochet as in the
    No. 10.

    13. Put 1 single crochet in each stitch around the face
    holding the turn-back flat against the cap.


    To Trim.—Fasten the pink silk at the left side of the
    neck, and put 1 single crochet, 2 chains and 3 double
    crochets in the first stitch.

    2. Skip 2 stitches, and put 1 single crochet, 2 chains,
    and 3 double crochets in the third stitch.

    3. Continue to do this all around the cape and the face
    of the hood or bonnet, and then around the edge of the
    turn-back.

    4. Holding the face of the hood toward you, put a
    single crochet in the front loop of each stitch all
    around the first row of double crochet in the turn-back.

    5. Do the same to the other 2 rows of the turn-back.


DOLL’S CROCHETED COACH COVER

(Coffee Bean Stitch)

    Material: White four-fold Germantown zephyr with pink
    four-fold Germantown zephyr for trimming. Bone crochet
    hook, No. 6.

    Directions:

    NOTE.—In doing this work, make loose stitches.

[Illustration]


TO MAKE COFFEE BEAN STITCH

    1. Chain 50; that is, make 50 chain stitches.

    2. (_a_) Skip 2 chains, and put the hook through the
    third chain stitch.

    (_b_) Wrap (throw yarn over hook) and pull the hook
    through the stitch.

    (_c_) Wrap. Put hook through the same chain stitch:
    Wrap, and pull hook through the stitch.

    (_d_) Wrap. Put hook through the same chain stitch.

    Wrap, and pull hook through the same stitch.

    There will now be 6 stitches on the crochet needle.

    (_e_) Throw yarn over hook, and draw it through the 6
    stitches on the needle.

    3. Chain 1.

    4. Skip 1 chain stitch in the chain first made (see
    direction No. 1 above) and repeat direction No. 2. This
    will make another bean stitch.

    5. Continue to make bean stitches to the end of chain,
    making 25 beans in all. Turn the work.

    6. Second row: Draw a loop through the second stitch
    from the needle.

    Throw yarn over hook and proceed to make another bean.
    Chain 1, and skip 1 stitch and continue in this way to
    the end of the row.

    Make in all—

     6 rows of white
     4 rows of pink
    22 rows of white
     4 rows of pink
     6 rows of white


    To Make the Scallops:

    1. Fasten the white wool in the first stitch of the top
    with single crochet.

    2. Put 5 double crochets in the next stitch.

    3. Skip 1 stitch and put 1 single crochet in the next
    stitch. (This will hold the scallop down.)

    4. Skip 1 stitch and put 5 double crochets in the next
    stitch. Fasten scallop down with 1 single crochet as in
    direction No. 3. Continue to make scallops all around
    the cover. Break off white yarn and fasten.

    5. Attach pink yarn, and put 1 single crochet in the
    white single crochet.

    6. Put 5 double crochets around the third stitch of the
    white scallops.

    The double crochets are put around the third stitch as
    in making Doll’s Crocheted Hat, page 207.

    7. Fasten scallop down with single crochet in the
    single crochet between the white scallops.

    8. Continue to make scallops this way all around the
    cover. Break off the yarn, and fasten the end.


DOLL’S CROCHETED SPORTS HAT

(See picture opposite page 72)

    Material: Rose pink wool floss, Gray Angora or Teazle
    wool for trimming. Bone crochet hook, No. 3.

[Illustration]

    Directions:

    1. Chain 3; that is, make 3 chain stitches.

    2. First row: Put 6 single crochets in second chain
    stitch. Do not join.

    3. Second row: Put 2 single crochets in each of the 6
    single crochets, taking up both loops.

    4. Third row: Put 2 single crochets in the first
    stitch, 1 single crochet in the next stitch. Continue
    around row.

    5. Fourth row: Put 2 single crochets in the first
    stitch, 1 single crochet in each of the next 2
    stitches. Continue around row.

    6. Continue to widen in this way until there are 11
    stitches in each section, or 66 stitches in the row.

    7. Make 6 rows without increasing.

    8. Make 10 single crochets; skip 1 stitch and continue
    to do this until there are but 48 stitches.

    9. Turn, and work on the wrong side of the hat.

    10. Make 1 row of single crochet without increasing.

    11. On the next 2 rows, increase in every third stitch,
    as in direction No. 5.

    12. Make 1 row of single crochet without increasing.

    13. Finish off the pink by taking 2 slip stitches.

    14. Fasten on the trimming wool, and make 1 single
    crochet in each stitch all around for 2 rows.

    15. Make 1 row of slip stitches. Break off and fasten
    yarn.


DOLL’S CROCHETED BREAKFAST CAP

(See page 87)

[Illustration]

    Material: Pink or white, or pink and white, or light
    blue and white luster cotton. Steel crochet hook No. 7.
    1 yard “baby” ribbon to match cap.

    Directions:

    The work is begun in the center of the top.

    1. Chain 5; that is, make 5 chain stitches. Join in a
    ring with slip stitch. Chain 4.

    2. First row: Make 20 treble crochets in the ring (see
    page 228). Join last stitch to top stitch of chain with
    slip stitch.

    3. Second row: Chain 4. Put 1 single crochet into each
    treble crochet with 4 chain stitches between the single
    crochet, thus making a loop of the chain stitches.

    4. Third row: Chain 4. Make 1 single crochet in each
    chain loop with 4 chain stitches between.

    5. Fourth row: Same as third row.

    6. Fifth and sixth rows: Chain 5. Make 1 single crochet
    in each chain loop, with 5 chain stitches between.

    7. Seventh and eighth rows: Chain 6. Make 1 single
    crochet in each chain loop with 6 chain stitches
    between.

    8. Ninth row: Chain 4. Make 1 single crochet in the
    loop of the row below. Chain 4. Make 1 single crochet
    in the first single crochet of row. Chain 4. Make 1
    single crochet in next loop. Chain 4. Make 1 single
    crochet in next single crochet. Continue around the row.

    9. Tenth row: Chain 4. Make 1 single crochet in each
    loop to end.

    10. Eleventh and twelfth rows: Like tenth row.

    11. Thirteenth row: Chain 4. Make 1 double crochet in
    chain loop. Chain 1. Make 1 double crochet in first
    single crochet. Chain 1. Make 1 double crochet in next
    chain loop. Chain 1. Make 1 double crochet in next
    single crochet. Continue to end of row.

    12. Fourteenth row: Chain 4. Put 1 double crochet
    in each space of thirteenth row with 1 chain stitch
    between and join last stitch to top of the chain 4 with
    a slip stitch.

    13. Fifteenth row: Chain 1. Make 1 single crochet in
    each double crochet of fourteenth row.

    14. Sixteenth row: Chain 3. Make 1 double crochet in
    each single crochet of fifteenth row. (When the cap is
    finished run ribbon through these stitches.)

    15. Seventeenth row: Chain 4. Make 1 single crochet in
    the second double crochet of sixteenth row. Chain 4.
    Make 1 single crochet in the fourth double crochet.
    Continue to end of row.

    16. Eighteenth and nineteenth rows: Chain 5. Make 1
    single crochet in each chain loop of previous row with
    5 chain stitches between. Break off and fasten thread.

    Trim with ribbon rosette.


DOLL’S CROCHETED GARTERS

(See picture opposite page 40)

    Material: Pink or light blue mercerized crochet cotton.
    (In ordering this material, mention what you are going
    to make, so that you will be given the right size of
    thread.) Steel crochet hook, No. 9.


    Directions:

    1. Chain 10; that is, make 10 chain stitches.

    2. Put 2 double crochets and 1 chain and 2 double
    crochets in the fourth stitch from the needle.

    3. Chain 5.

    4. Put 2 double crochets and 1 chain and 2 double
    crochets in the end chain stitch.

    5. Chain 3 and turn.

    6. Put 2 double crochets and 1 chain and 2 double
    crochets between the second and third double crochet in
    the cluster below. (This cluster was made by direction
    No. 4 above.)

    7. Chain 5, and repeat direction No. 6 in the next
    cluster below.

    8. Repeat directions No. 5, 6, 7, again. This will make
    3 rows.

    9. On the fourth row, make the cluster (No. 4). Chain
    2. Make 1 single crochet around the 2 rows of 5 chains
    below.

    10. Chain 2 and continue with the clusters, catching
    chains together in every fourth row. Make work long
    enough to cover the doll’s elastic garter very loosely.

    11. Run rubber garter through the crocheted work and
    fasten ends of garter. Sew a ribbon bow over the
    joining.


A CHILD’S GARTER

    is made in the same way, using a few more stitches in
    each row across.


DOLL’S CROCHETED SHOPPING BAG

(See picture opposite page 104)

    Material: Ecru crochet cotton, No. 5. Two brass rings
    to fit doll’s wrist. Steel crochet hook No. 7.


    Directions:

    This work is begun at the bottom of the bag.

    1. Chain 25; that is, make 25 chain stitches.

    2. Using 1 chain to turn, make 24 single crochets in
    the chain. Put 2 more single crochets in the last
    stitch.

    3. Make 1 single crochet in each stitch on the other
    side of the chain, putting 2 single crochets in end
    stitch.

[Illustration: DOLL’S SHOPPING BAG]

    4. Now work around and around without joining the rows.
    Chain 3, skip 1 stitch, make 1 single crochet in the
    second stitch. Continue doing this around the first row.

    5. On the next row, chain 3, make 1 single crochet
    around the chain 3 of the row below. Continue doing
    this until there are 13 rows.

    6. On the fourteenth row, work half way around. Make
    3 chains to turn, and put 1 single crochet in the
    first chain loop. Chain 3, and continue across, making
    stitches as in direction No. 5. Make 5 rows. This will
    make the division which forms the opening.

    7. Next row: Chain 3. Make 1 double crochet in each
    chain loop, with 1 chain between.

    8. Next row: Chain 3. Make 1 double crochet in each
    double crochet of row just made.

    9. Last row: Chain 1. Make 1 single crochet in each
    double crochet of row below. Do not break off the
    thread.


    To Fasten Bag to Handles:

    1. With the last stitch made on the needle, put hook
    through one of the brass rings which will be used as a
    handle. Very nearly fill the ring with single crochet.
    Fold the ring down inside the bag, and make single
    crochet through the ring and top of bag, putting 1
    single crochet in each stitch.

    This will entirely cover the ring, and attach it to the
    bag at the same time, and will also make a neat finish
    on the right side of the work.

    2. Break off and fasten end of thread.

    3. To make other side of opening.—Start at right-hand
    side of opening. Make 3 chains. Put 1 single crochet in
    first chain loop, and continue to work in the same way
    as you made the first side.


DOLL’S CROCHETED SPORTS SWEATER

(See frontispiece)

    Material: Burnt orange double floss with black double
    floss for trimming three small wooden button molds.
    Bone crochet hook, No. 2.


    Directions:

    To Make Front:

    1. With orange floss, chain 25; that is, make 25 chain
    stitches.

    2. Make 24 single crochets. Chain 1 to turn.

[Illustration: DOLL’S SPORTS SWEATER]

    3. Taking front thread of stitch only, put 1 single
    crochet in each of 24 single crochets, and add 1 single
    crochet in the last stitch. Chain 1 to turn.

    4. Continue in this way (No. 3), adding 1 single
    crochet at neck end until there are 27 stitches.

    5. On the next row add 4 chains after making 27 single
    crochets.

    6. Put 1 single crochet in each of 3 of these chains,
    and 1 single crochet in each of the 27 single crochets,
    making 30 single crochets in all.

    7. Continue to make rows of 30 single crochets until
    there are 13 rows from the beginning.

    8. On the fourteenth row, make 20 single crochets. Make
    8 rows of 20 single crochets for under arm.

    9. On the twenty-third row, add 11 chain stitches. Use
    1 chain to turn, and make 10 single crochets in the
    chain stitch,—also 20 single crochets in the single
    crochets (see No. 8) under arm.

    10. Make 21 rows of the 30 stitches for the back.

    11. On the next row (the forty-fourth) make 20 single
    crochets for 8 rows under arm.

    12. On the next row (the fifty-second) add 11 chain
    stitches. Use 1 chain to turn. Make 10 single crochets
    in the chain and 20 single crochets in the under arm
    stitches.

    13. Make 7 rows of the 30 single crochets.

    14. On the next row make 27 stitches. (Be sure to make
    this row from the bottom upward.) Make 1 chain to turn.

    15. Skip the first single crochet at the neck, and make
    26 single crochets.

    16. Continue to decrease 1 single crochet at the neck
    until you have only 24 single crochet stitches in the
    row.

    This finishes the body of the sweater.

    17. Sew 7 rows of the front and back at the shoulders
    to form armholes. (See picture, page 130.)


    Border around the Sweater:

    1. Starting at the left side of the neck, holding
    outside of the sweater toward you, put 1 single crochet
    in each stitch all around the sweater until you come
    to the right side of the neck, except at the corner
    stitches at the bottom, in which put 3 single crochets.

    2. Chain 1 to turn, and work back to the starting point
    in the same way.

    3. Then put one row of slip stitches all around sweater.


    To Make the Buttons:

    Make 5 buttons of orange floss just as you made the
    buttons on the doll’s pink sweater (see page 205).

    Thread a long-eyed needle with black floss and decorate
    the buttons with cross stitches around the edges.


    To Make the Collar:

    1. With black floss, chain 31. Use 1 chain stitch to
    turn.

    2. Make 30 single crochets. Make 1 chain.

    3. Make 6 rows of 30 single crochets, taking both
    threads.

    4. Make 16 rows of 15 single crochets.

    5. Make 6 rows of 30 single crochets. (Add chain
    stitches as for lengthening in No. 9 above.)

    6. With two strands of the black floss put 1 row of
    single crochet across the bottom edge of the back of
    the collar.

    7. With single black floss put 1 row of slip stitches
    all around the collar.

[Illustration]

    To Make the Sleeve:

    1. Chain 9.

    2. Make 8 single crochets. Chain 1.

    3. Second row: Put 2 single crochets in the first
    stitch. Make 1 single crochet in each stitch to the end
    of the row. Chain 3 to turn.

    4. Third row: Make 1 single crochet in each of the 2
    chains, and make single crochet to the end.

    5. Fourth row: Put 2 single crochets in the first
    stitch; single crochet to the end of row. Chain 5. Turn.

    6. Fifth row: Put 4 single crochets in the chain, and
    single crochet to end of the row. 1 chain.

    7. Sixth row: Put 2 single crochets in the first
    stitch; single crochet to end of row. 1 chain.

    8. Seventh row: Make 17 single crochets, 1 chain.

    9. Eighth row: Put 2 single crochets in the first
    stitch; single crochet to end. Make 1 chain.

    10. Make 6 more rows of 18 stitches.

    11. On the fifteenth row, skip the stitch next to the
    last. Make 1 chain.

    12. Sixteenth row: Make 17 single crochets and 1 chain.

    13. Seventeenth row is the same as the fifteenth row.

    14. Eighteenth row is 16 single crochets and 1 chain.

    15. Nineteenth row: Put a slip stitch in each of the
    first 4 stitches; single crochet to the end of the row,
    skipping the next to the last stitch. Chain 1.

    16. Twentieth row: Make 11 single crochets and 1 chain.

    17. Twenty-first row: Make slip stitch in the first 2
    stitches; single crochet to the end of row, skipping
    next to the last stitch. Chain 1.

    18. Twenty-second row: Make 8 single crochets. Sew up
    the sleeve.

    With orange floss, put 2 rows of single crochet around
    the hand, taking both threads of stitches.

    Add 2 rows of black single crochet and 1 row of black
    slip stitches.


    To Make the Belt:

    1. Chain 5.

    2. Make 4 single crochets. Chain 1 to turn.

    3. Taking both threads, make 4 single crochets and 1
    chain to turn until the belt is the length desired.
    (About 28 rows.)

    Sew the sleeves in the armholes as in making Teddy Bear
    Sweater (see page 133).

    Sew buttons in place and make loops as in making Teddy
    Bear Sweater.

    Sew belt at waist line under arm, sewing a button on
    each end.

    Sew the collar to the neck of the sweater.


DOLL’S CROCHETED FLOWER BASKET[O]

(See picture opposite page 230)

    Material: White or tan crochet cotton No. 10. Steel
    crochet hook No. 7.


    Directions:

    To Make Bottom of Basket:

    1. Chain 5; that is, make 5 chain stitches. Join into a
    ring with a slip stitch.

    2. Chain 5.

    3. Make 15 treble crochets in the ring with 1 chain
    stitch between each treble crochet. Join the last
    treble crochet into the fourth chain stitch (see No. 2)
    with slip stitch.

    4. Second row: Chain 4. Make 1 double crochet in the
    space between the first 2 treble crochets. Chain 2.
    Make 1 double crochet in next space. Make 2 chain
    stitches. Continue in this way around the row. Join
    (with slip stitches) the last of the 2 chain stitches
    into the third chain of the 4 chain stitches.

    5. Third row: Chain 3. Put 2 double crochets in the
    first space between first 2 double crochets in previous
    row. Make 2 chains. Put 2 double crochets in the next
    space. Make 2 chains. Continue around the row, and join
    the last chain with the top of the 3 chains.


    To make the Scallops:

    6. Make 1 single crochet, 3 double crochets, 1 single
    crochet in each space between double crochets in the
    row below.


    To Make the Sides of the Basket:

    1. Turn the under or wrong side of the bottom of the
    basket toward you. Bend down the scallops under the
    thumb.

    2. Chain 3.

    3. Put hook through the top of the first double crochet
    made in the second row. (See No. 4, page 246.) Fasten
    chain which is on needle with a slip stitch. (See
    picture.)

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

    4. Chain 3. Put 2 crochets in each space between the
    double crochet in the second row. Join last and first
    stitch with slip stitch.

    5. Chain 3.

    Put 2 double crochets in the space between the first
    two clusters of double crochet in the row below. Chain
    1.

    Continue to end of row. Join with slip stitch.

    6. Make 3 more rows in the same way.

    7. The next row is made in the same way, except that 2
    chains are put between the clusters of stitches.

    8. Finish the top of sides with scallops like the ones
    on the bottom of the basket. (See No. 6.)


    To Make the Handles:

    1. Chain 3.

    2. Put 4 double crochets at the top of the first two
    scallops. (See picture.)

    3. Chain 3. Turn. Make 1 double crochet in each of the
    4 double crochets.

    4. Repeat No. 3 until handle is about 12 rows long, or
    as long as desired.

    5. Fasten end to opposite side of basket with slip
    stitch.

    6. Run ribbon through the spaces in the sixth row of
    sides, and tie in a bow.


GIRL’S CROCHETED HAND BAG

(Crazy Stitch)

(See picture opposite page 104)

    Material: Heavy mercerized Old Blue crochet cotton,
    about No. 5. Steel crochet hook, No. 3.


    Directions:

    This bag is made with

CRAZY STITCH

    1. Chain 28 stitches; that is, make 28 chain stitches.

    2. In the fourth stitch from needle, put 3 double
    crochets.

    3. Skip 3 chains and put 1 single crochet, 2 chains, 3
    double crochets, in the fourth chain stitch.

    4. Skip 3 chains and repeat the cluster to the end of
    the chain, fastening the last cluster in the end stitch
    of the 35 chain stitches with a single crochet.

[Illustration]

    5. Second row: Chain 3, and turn the work. Make 3
    double crochets in the single crochet that fastened the
    last cluster to the end of the chain. (See picture.)

    6. Make 1 single crochet, 2 chains, 3 double crochets
    between the third double crochet and the 2 chains of
    the row below. (See picture.)

    7. Continue in this way, making clusters until there
    are 9 rows. Break off and fasten thread. This makes one
    side.

    8. To make other side. Fasten the cotton in the last
    chain stitch of the chain first made. (See No. 1.)

    9. Make 9 rows of clusters.

    10. Fold, and crochet sides together with single
    crochets.

    11. Make 1 row of clusters all around the top of the
    bag.

    12. Make 1 single crochet in the chain stitches in the
    first cluster of the row of clusters just finished.

    13. Make 3 double crochets in the single crochets
    between the clusters.

    14. Put 1 single crochet in the chain of the next
    cluster.

    15. Repeat Nos. 12, 13, 14 around top.


    To Make Runner Spaces:

    1. Chain 3.

    2. Put 1 double crochet in the first double crochet of
    the first scallop. Chain 1.

    3. Put 1 double crochet in the third double crochet of
    scallop. Continue No. 2 and 3 around top. Join with
    slip stitches.


    To Make Top Scallops:

    1. Make 1 single crochet in the first runner space.

    2. Make 2 double crochets in the next space.

    3. Make 1 double crochet in the double crochet between
    the spaces.

    4. Make 2 double crochets in the next space.

    5. Make 1 single crochet in the next space. This makes
    1 scallop.

    6. Make scallops in this way all around the top.

    7. Make 1 single crochet in the top of the first double
    crochet of first scallop.

    8. Chain 3.

    9. Draw a loop through each of the first and second
    stitches of scallops, and take the 3 loops off the
    needle as one stitch.

    10. Repeat Nos. 8 and 9 around the top.


    To Make the Runner:

    Cut 3 strands of the cotton about 1½ yards long. Lay
    side by side and twist as in making trimming for Doll’s
    Crocheted Hat, page 209.

    Make 2 runners in this way, and tie a knot in one end
    of each.

    Run them through runner spaces from opposite sides of
    bag and tie them in hard knots at the ends.

    Cut ends even to look like tassels.


BABY’S CROCHETED BOOTEES

    Materials: White four-fold Saxony wool. Pink four-fold
    Saxony wool. Bone crochet hook No. 3.

    Four small flat pearl buttons.


    Directions:

    (The work is commenced at “B.”)

    1. With white wool chain 34; that is, make 34 chain
    stitches.

    2. Skip the first chain stitch, and make 1 single
    crochet in each of the next 16 chain stitches.

    3. Put 3 single crochets in the seventeenth stitch, and
    1 single crochet in each of the next 16 chain stitches.
    Make 1 chain to turn.

    4. Second row: Taking the back thread of the stitch,
    make 1 single crochet in each stitch, except the
    eighteenth stitch. In the eighteenth stitch put 3
    single crochets. The 2 rows now made from a rib. Make
    1 pink rib, putting 3 single crochets in the middle
    stitch at the toe. Make 1 white rib and 1 more pink rib
    in the same way. Do not break off the yarn. Just let
    it hang in back of the work, and crochet back edges
    (from A to B) together with the pink yarn, using slip
    stitches. Break off and fasten wool.


    To Make Sole:

    1. Fasten white yarn at the joining place at the
    bottom, holding right side (outside) of bootee toward
    you.

    2. Make 3 chain stitches. Taking back thread only,
    make 1 double crochet in each stitch all around edge
    of sock. Join last stitch to the 3 chains with slip
    stitches.

    3. Second row: Chain 3. Make 1 double crochet in each
    double crochet of row just made. Join end in same way.

[Illustration]

    4. Fold sock from toe to heel with right sides in, and
    join the opening in the sole with slip stitch, catching
    back threads only of opposite stitches.

    Break off wool and fasten end. Turn sock right side out.

    5. To make finishing edge of sole—hold narrow part of
    sock toward you, toe pointing toward your left hand.
    Fasten pink yarn at joining place in back, and make
    1 row of single crochet all around sole edge of sock
    (along the place where the double crochets were first
    made), taking front thread of stitches of last rib made
    in vamp, or upper, of sock.


    To Make Top of Bootee.

    1. Fasten pink yarn in second stitch from middle of
    the front. (In making sock for the right foot, point
    the toe toward your right hand with the sole toward
    you. Point toe toward left hand in making sock for left
    foot.)

    2. Make 1 row of single crochet all around the ledge.
    Break off yarn and fasten end.

    3. Fasten white yarn in top of first single crochet.
    The top of the sock is made with


STAR STITCH

    Practice making this stitch with four-fold Germantown
    wool. Make 14 chain stitches. Skip 1 chain stitch. Make
    13 single crochets in the chain.

    1. Make 3 chain stitches. Turn the work. Draw a loop up
    in each of first two chain stitches of the three chain
    stitches just made. Draw a loop up in each of the first
    two single crochets on the edge taking both threads.
    There will be 5 loops on the needle.

    Wrap the yarn around the needle, and pull a loop
    through all the loops on the needle.

    Make 1 chain stitch. This last chain stitch draws all
    the loops into a little “eye.”

    2. For the second star stitch, pull a loop through the
    “eye” of the first star stitch. Pull a loop through
    the _back_ thread of the last loop of the first star
    stitch. (See “A” in picture below.)

    Pull a loop through each of the next 2 single crochets
    on edge. This will make 5 loops on the needle. Wrap and
    pull yarn through all the loops on the needle at one
    time.

    Make 1 chain stitch to form the “eye.”

    3. Repeat direction No. 2 all around sock. Break off
    and fasten yarn.

    4. Second row of star stitches. To make the first star
    stitch on this row—fasten white yarn into top of first
    star stitch and make 3 chains.

    Draw a loop through each of 2 chain stitches. Draw a
    loop through the “eye” of the star stitch below (the
    first one made).

    Draw a loop through the _next_ stitch at the top of the
    first star stitch, taking up the 2 threads. This makes
    5 loops on the needle. Wrap and draw a loop through all
    5 loops. Make 1 chain.

    5. In making the next stitch, draw up a loop in the
    “eye” of the star stitch just made. (See A in picture.)
    Draw up a loop in _back_ thread of the last loop of the
    star stitch just made. (See B.) Pull a loop through the
    “eye” of the next star stitch in the row below. (See
    C.) Pull a loop through under the next _two_ threads on
    the edge of the row below. (See D.) Pull a loop through
    the 5 loops on the needle. Make 1 chain stitch. Repeat
    this direction around the sock.

    6. Make another row of white star stitches.

    7. Make another row of pink star stitches.

[Illustration]

    To Make the Scallops:

    1. Holding the sole of the sock toward you, fasten the
    pink yarn at the opening point (near the lower button
    in the picture).

    2. Make a row of single crochet along opening edge to
    the top.

    3. In the corner stitch at the top, make 1 single
    crochet and 2 chain stitches and 3 double crochets.

    4. Make scallop by direction No. 3 in the “eye” of each
    star stitch around the top.

    5. Make a row of single crochet along the other edge of
    the opening. Break off and fasten yarn.


    For Buttonhole Loops:

    Fasten pink wool at top edge of the opening, and
    working toward the sole, make 2 slip stitches.

    Make 2 chain stitches. Skip 2 stitches on the edge and
    make 2 slip stitches. Make another loop in the same way
    and finish edge of opening with slip stitches. Break
    off and fasten yarn.

    Fasten all ends securely.

    Sew two buttons opposite the loops.


BABY’S CROCHETED BALL

(See picture opposite page 230.)

    Material: White four-fold Germantown zephyr, Pink
    Germantown zephyr. Bone crochet hook No. 8.

    Directions:

    1. With pink yarn, chain 5; that is, make 5 chain
    stitches.

    2. Join into a ring with slip stitches.

    3. Put 1 single crochet in the ring.


    To Make Curly Stitch:

    4. With the stitch now on the needle, put the hook
    through the ring, draw the yarn through the ring,
    and make 4 chain stitches. Then the stitches _on the
    needle_ will look like the picture at top of page 253.

    5. Do _not_ wrap, but draw the last chain stitch
    through the stitch on the needle.

    6. Make 1 single crochet in the ring.

    7. Repeat Nos. 4 and 5, being sure to have the loop of
    chain stitches on the right side of work.

    8. Make 5 of the loops of chain stitches in the ring
    (in all).

    9. Second row: Put 1 single crochet in the top of the
    first single crochet in the ring and a curly stitch in
    the next stitch.[P]

[Illustration]

    10. To widen.—Put the single crochet and the curly
    stitch in the same stitch. This is done in about every
    third stitch until the ball is as wide as you wish to
    make it.

    11. Make 5 rows of pink.
             3 rows of white.
             2 rows of pink.

    This will finish half of the ball.

    12. Make another half, and sew the two halves together,
    leaving about 2 inches open for filling.

    13. Fill with raw cotton. Bury in the cotton several
    little brass bells. Or fill with odds and ends of
    left-over yarn.

    14. Finish sewing together.

[Illustration: CURLY STITCH]


LADY’S CROCHETED NECKLACE

(See picture opposite page 200)

    Material: Mercerized cotton, or silk—any color desired,
    6 glass beads with large threading holes. Steel crochet
    hook No. 7.


    Directions:

    Make two balls first in this way:


HOW TO MAKE BUTTON BALLS

    1. Make 4 chain stitches. Join first and last stitches
    in a ring with a slip stitch.

    2. Make 2 single crochets in each chain stitch. There
    will be 8 stitches. Do not join them. Work round and
    round.

    3. Make 2 single crochets in each stitch of first row
    (16 stitches).

    4. Make 6 rows of 16 stitches each, or 96 single
    crochets, working round and round.

    5. Stuff this form just made with soft cotton, filling
    it until it is firm but not hard. Then draw in the top
    of the ball by making single crochets in every other
    stitch until the opening is closed.

    Cut off the thread about 5 inches from the ball, and
    draw it through the last stitch. Leave the end hanging.

[Illustration]

    To Make the Chain:

    1. Thread the 6 beads on the cotton and push them back
    near the spool.

    2. Commencing about 5 inches from the end of the
    cotton, make 2 _loose_ chain stitches. Pull out the
    loop of the second chain stitch until it is nearly ½
    inch long.


    To Make Bead Stitch:

    3. Now throw the thread over the crochet needle; that
    is, “wrap,” (holding the chain stitch between the thumb
    and second finger of the left hand) and put the hook
    into the first chain stitch under 2 threads. Throw the
    thread over the needle and pull a long loop through the
    chain stitches, making it the length of the first drawn
    through.

    Throw the thread over the crochet needle, or “wrap,”
    and draw another loop up on the hook in the same way.

    Continue to wrap and draw up loops in this way until
    there are 7 loose loops on the crochet needle. (See
    picture.) Wrap once again, and draw a loose loop
    through all 7 loops already on the needle.

[Illustration]

    Wrap and draw a loop through the stitch then on the
    needle. Draw this stitch through until it is the length
    of the loops in the first cluster.

    Holding the first cluster between the thumb and second
    finger of the left hand, wrap, and put hook through the
    loop just below the loop on the needle (at the right),
    and _back_ of the _single_ thread at the left. (See
    picture above.)

    Draw up a loop.

    Wrap; draw up a loop and continue to draw up loops
    until there are 7 loops on the needle. Wrap, and draw a
    loose loop through the seven loops. Make 1 loose chain
    stitch.

    Make another cluster of stitches to form another bead.

    After the third cluster is made, make 3 chain stitches,
    and slip 1 bead down the thread until it meets the
    chain. Put the hook through the hole in the bead, and
    catch the last chain stitch. Pull the bead down over
    the chain stitches.

    Draw up the last loop of the chain about ½ inch, and
    make a cluster of stitches as in beginning the work.

    Make 2 more clusters; add another bead.

    Make 2 more clusters, and add one more bead.

    Continue to make clusters until the chain is nearly as
    long as desired. Then add the beads as explained above
    and make 3 more clusters. Cut off thread about 5 inches
    from the end of the work, and make one chain stitch to
    fasten end, drawing it all the way through.


    To Fasten Balls on Ends of the Chain:

    Thread the end of cotton left on the chain into a
    long-eyed needle and sew with several stitches to the
    top of the ball, running the end well down into the
    ball to fasten it securely before cutting it off.


LADY’S CROCHETED PURSE

(See picture opposite page 104)

    Material: Fine mercerized blue, or lavender, or pink,
    or ecru, or gray, crochet cotton. Steel crochet needle
    No. 9. One bone ring, about 1⅛ inch across.


    Directions:

    1. Chain 8; that is, make 8 chain stitches. Join in
    ring with slip stitch.

    2. First row: Chain 3. Put 2 double crochets in each
    stitch of chains.

    Join with slip stitch.

    3. Second row: Like the first row.

    4. Third row: Chain 3. Make 1 double crochet in the
    first stitch of row below. Make 2 double crochets
    in the next; 1 double crochet in the next; 2 double
    crochets in the next; and so on to the end of row. Join.

    5. Fourth row: Chain 3.

    Make 1 double crochet in each of the first 2 stitches;
    2 double crochets in the third stitch; and so on to the
    end of the row.

    6. Fifth and sixth rows: Chain 3. Put 1 double crochet
    in each stitch with 1 chain between.

    This makes one side.

    7. Make another side like the one just finished.

    8. Join sides with picot edging.

[Illustration: FRONT, SHOWING FLAPS]


HOW TO MAKE PICOT EDGING

    Use a piece of rather heavy cord to practice making
    picot (pēkō) edge.

    1. Make a chain of 15 stitches.

    2. Turn and make 14 single crochets. Make 1 chain
    stitch.

    3. Turn, and putting hook under two threads, make 2
    single crochets.

    4. Make 3 chain stitches.

    5. Now, pointing the hook toward the left thumb, put it
    through the top loop of the single crochet _last_ made
    (where the chain was started), and then put it through
    the _lower front_ loop of the single crochet _last_
    made. (See picture, page 256.)

    6. Wrap and draw thread (a slip stitch) through all
    three loops and on needle. This forms a picot.

    7. Make 2 single crochets, and make another picot.
    Continue in this way across the row. Now you are ready
    to join the sides of the purse together.

    8. Hold both sides together with the joinings touching.
    Put the crochet hook through the space between the
    first 2 stitches on each side. Make 1 single crochet.
    Chain 3 and fasten last chain stitch to single crochet
    just made with slip stitch as in Nos. 5 and 6. This
    makes a picot.

    9. Continue to make picot edge, leaving 15 double
    crochets without the picot edge—to form an opening.


    To Make the Flap:

    (See picture on page 255)

    1. Chain 3.

    2. Put 2 double crochet in each space.

    3. Chain 3 to turn. Skip 3 double crochets and put
    1 double crochet in each of the 24 stitches. Skip 2
    double crochets and put 1 double crochet in the end
    double crochet.

[Illustration: PICOT EDGING]

    4. Chain 3 to turn. Skip 3 double crochet.

    Make 1 double crochet in each of 18 double crochets
    in lower row. Skip 2 double crochets and put 1 double
    crochet in the end double crochet.

    5. Chain 3. Skip 3 double crochets. Make 12 double
    crochets. Skip 2 double crochets. Make 1 double crochet
    on end.

    6. Chain 3. Skip 3 double crochets. Make 7 double
    crochets. Skip 2 double crochets. Make 1 double crochet
    on end.

    7. Chain 3. Skip 2 double crochets. Make 3 double
    crochets. Skip 2 double crochets. Make 1 double crochet
    on end.

    Break off and fasten cotton.

    8. Put picot edge around the flap in the same way as
    you did around the purse. Fasten thread.

    Fold flap over into place.


    To Make the Strings:

    1. Holding the back of the purse toward you, fasten the
    cotton into the fifth space from the joining point of
    the sides.

    2. Chain 25. Catch the twenty-fifth chain stitch into
    the bone ring with a single crochet.

    3. Chain 25. Skip 2 spaces on the top of the purse, and
    fasten the twenty-fifth chain into the third opening
    with a single crochet.

    4. Make 9 strings of chain stitches, fastening them at
    the ends as explained.

    5. Cover the ring with single crochet.

    6. Make 25 chain stitches, and fasten last chain stitch
    in the place where the strings were started. Fasten
    thread.

    7. Sew snap fasteners on purse and flap.


DOLL’S KNITTED MUFF

(See picture opposite page 200)

    Material: White Angora wool, or Teazle yarn. If Teazle
    yarn is used, before sewing the garments up, brush with
    a clean stiff brush to make them furry. Bone knitting
    needles No. 2.

[Illustration: BACK OF PURSE]

    Directions:

    1. Cast on 15 stitches.

    2. Knit 20 ribs (a row across and back makes a rib).

    3. Bind off.

    4. Sew beginning row and last row of stitches together,
    and line muff with satin.

    5. Make a long chain of the yarn to use to hang muff on
    doll’s neck.

    Trim lower edge with fringe. Cut 3½-inch strands of
    yarn for making fringe. Draw 2 strands through at a
    time.


DOLL’S KNITTED BOA OR STOLE

(See picture opposite page 200)

    Material and Needles: The same as for Doll’s Muff.


    Directions:

    1. Cast on 8 stitches. Knit plain.

    2. Increase 1 stitch on each rib at one end only until
    there are 14 stitches.

    3. Make 42 ribs on the 14 stitches; then

[Illustration: MUFF AND BOA]

    4. Narrow on one edge by knitting off 2 stitches
    together as one, on each rib until there are 8 stitches.

    5. Bind off.

    6. Trim with fringe same as fringe on muff.

    7. Make a 2-inch chain of gold color mercerized cotton
    and sew it to each side of the neck of the stole.

    8. Make 2 fancy rings like those made on doll’s
    sleeveless sweater (see page 189), and sew one over
    each place where the gold chain was fastened.


TO MAKE THE TRIMMING BAND ON HAT

(See picture opposite page 200)

    Crochet a chain a little longer than needed to meet
    around the band. Put 1 treble crochet into each chain
    stitch. (See page 228.)

    In sewing trimming band on hat, let the treble crochet
    puff out, and bring the edges of the band close
    together.

    The pompon is made in the same way as the pompons on
    the Doll’s Crochet Toque or Cap.


DOLL’S KNITTED BREAKFAST SHAWL

(See picture on page 87)

    Material: White wool floss and pink mercerized cotton.
    Bone knitting needles No. 5.


    Directions:

    1. With white floss cast on 30 stitches.

    2. Knit plain for 50 ribs. (A rib is a row across and
    back.)

    3. Bind off.

    4. Lay 1 strand of floss side by side with 1 strand of
    pink cotton, and pick up each stitch along edge for
    collar.

[Illustration]

    5. Knit plain, narrowing at each end (by knitting first
    2, and last 2 stitches together as one) until there are
    9 ribs.

    6. Bind off.

    7. Put 1 row of single crochet around edge of collar.

    8. Make tassels of the white and pink.

    9. Sew a tassel on each corner of the cape.


DOLL’S KNITTED SLEEVELESS SILK SWEATER

(See picture opposite page 230)

    Material: Mercerized rose pink cotton No. 3, with
    turquoise blue cotton No. 3 for trimming; or crochet
    silk No. 3. Bone crochet hook No. 3. Bone knitting
    needles No. 3.


    Directions:

    To Make the Back:

    1. With pink material cast on 36 stitches.

    2. Knit 2, purl 2, for 20 rows, slipping off first
    stitch on each row.

    3. Knit plain for 11 ribs. (A row across and back makes
    a rib.)

    4. Knit 2 stitches off as one at each end, every other
    row, until there are only 28 stitches on the needle.

    5. Knit plain until you have 20 ribs.

    6. Bind off.


    To Make the Front:

    1. Cast on 36 stitches and follow directions for making
    the back until the 11 ribs of plain knitting are
    finished.

    2. On the twelfth rib, narrow at each end by knitting
    first 2 and last 2 stitches together, making 34
    stitches on the needle.

    3. Slip 17 stitches on to a safety pin, keeping the
    remaining stitches on the needle.

    4. Narrow by knitting 2 stitches together at each end
    every other row until there are 11 stitches; then
    narrow only on the neck edge, every other row until
    there are 8 stitches.

[Illustration: DOLL’S SILK SWEATER]

    5. Knit ribs of 8 stitches until there are 23 ribs from
    the waist line to the shoulder, and bind off.

    6. Take the stitches off the safety pin on to the
    needle; and make other side like the first.

    Sew fronts and back of the sweater together under arms
    and on the shoulder lines.

    With the blue cotton, put 2 rows of single crochet
    around the armholes and neck taking up each stitch.


HOW TO CAST ON STITCHES WITH KNITTING NEEDLES

    1. Make a slip knot on one knitting needle near the end
    of the yarn.

    2. Knit 1 stitch. (See page 162, To Knit a Stitch.)
    Do not take the stitch off the left-hand needle, but
    stretch the new stitch (which is on the right-hand
    needle) and slip it over the point of the left-hand
    needle. (See picture on page 261.) Hold the stitch on
    the left needle with the thumb of the left hand.

    Continue to make new stitches and slip them on the
    left needle until there are the number of stitches
    required.[Q]

[Illustration: TO CAST ON STITCHES WITH KNITTING NEEDLES (See page 260)]

[Illustration: 2 and 3. THE CONTINENTAL METHOD OF KNITTING (See page
262)]


THE CONTINENTAL METHOD OF KNITTING

    This method is a little more rapid than the Colonial
    or English method, but is not so much used. Notice the
    position of the hands in the picture.

    To knit plain the straight thread on the second finger
    of the left hand is lifted with the point of the right
    needle. Cut 2.

    A loop is drawn through; and the top loop on the left
    needle is drawn off the point of the left needle. Cut
    3. Finish this row.

    To purl, hold hand in same position as above. Slip
    the first stitch off the left needle. Put the point
    of the right needle under the thread which is fast to
    the ball, and lift it toward you over the left needle,
    holding the thread on the right needle with the right
    thumb.

    Keeping the thread on top of the right needle put the
    point through the top of the first loop on the left
    needle, pointing the right needle toward the middle of
    the palm of the left hand.

    Lift the point of the right needle toward you and over
    the thread. Push the point of the right needle backward
    through the loop on the left needle (which the right
    needle is already through) carrying the thread through
    the loop.

    Slip the top loop off the point of the left needle.


TO CAST OFF STITCHES

(Another method of binding off work)

    1. Slip the first stitch. 2. Pointing the left needle
    toward the first finger of the right hand, insert it in
    the slipped stitch _under_ the right needle. The two
    needles will now be crossed in the loop. 3. With the
    thumb and first finger of the left hand push this loop
    over and back of the next stitch on the left needle,
    and knit the next stitch, bringing the two loops off
    the left needle. Repeat to end.

    In using the Continental Method, the thread is thrown
    as in purling.




CHAPTER XXXVIII

TWO MORE SWEATERS


CHILD’S KNITTED SWEATER[R]

Size 6 to 8 years

    7 balls colored Shetland floss, 1 ball white. 1 pair
    knitting needles No. 7.

    _Body._ With colored floss cast on 72 stitches (16
    inches), knit 6 ribs (12 rows), drop floss temporarily;
    with white knit 1 rib and fasten off; pick up colored
    floss and knit 5 ribs; join white and knit 1 rib,
    fasten off; with colored floss knit 50 ribs. Work
    should now measure about 16 inches from beginning.
    Cast on 50 stitches at each side for sleeves and knit
    22 ribs. On next row knit 77 stitches and slip on to
    a spare needle, bind off 18 stitches for neck, knit
    remaining 77 stitches and knit back. Increase one
    stitch at neck every other rib 12 times, bind off the
    50 sleeve stitches and on the remaining 39 stitches
    knit 15 ribs even, ending the last row at front
    opening; slip these stitches on to the spare needle and
    knit the other front to correspond, ending the last row
    at underarm. Knit stitches from both fronts (78) on to
    one needle and knit even for 35 rows, then work border
    as on back; bind off loosely on wrong side.

    _Cuff._ Working with colored floss from wrong side pick
    up 35 stitches around wrist and knit 4 ribs, with white
    knit 1 rib, with colored floss knit 5 ribs, with white
    1 rib, with colored floss 2 ribs; bind off loosely on
    wrong side. Sew up sleeves and underarm seams, turn
    back cuff.

    _Collar._ With colored floss cast on 56 stitches and
    knit 2 ribs, with white knit 1 rib, with colored floss
    knit 5 ribs, with white knit 1 rib, with colored floss
    knit 22 ribs. Next row knit 18 stitches and slip on
    to a spare needle, bind off 20 stitches for neck;
    on remaining 18 stitches knit left side of collar,
    increase one stitch at neck every other rib 11 times,
    working border as in back after 13th rib from neck;
    bind off on wrong side and knit other side of collar to
    correspond.

    _Sash._ With colored floss cast on 15 stitches and knit
    6 ribs, with white knit 1 rib, with colored floss knit
    5 ribs, with white knit 1 rib, with colored floss knit
    34 inches and then work border as at other end. Cut
    white floss in strands 4 inches long; knot 2 strands in
    each stitch and tie all together one inch from end of
    sash, to form a tassel. Attach sash to underarm seams
    with pearl buttons. Lace front with a ribbon tie.


LADY’S KNITTED SWEATER[S]

    27 balls colored Germantown, 1 ball white. 1 pair
    knitting needles No. 5.

    This sweater is knitted crosswise in plain stitch.
    (Garter stitch.) The stars mean to repeat the
    directions between them.

    _Back._ Cast on 120 stitches (24 inches), *knit 5 ribs
    even; in 6th rib decrease 1 stitch at each side; repeat
    from *4 times, then decrease every 10th rib each side
    6 times; knit 10 ribs even, or until piece measures 20
    inches at side. Bind off 6 stitches at each side for
    armholes, then decrease one stitch every other rib 6
    times—12 stitches, in all, decreased for each armhole.
    The 74 stitches now left on needle should not measure
    more than 15 inches; knit 18 ribs even. *In next row
    leave 5 stitches at end of needle, turn and knit to
    within 5 stitches at other end, turn, thus working
    back and forth, each time leaving 5 stitches more than
    before at end of needle on both sides until only 34
    stitches are worked over, then knit 2 ribs over the
    entire 74 stitches on needle and bind off.

[Illustration: _Courtesy of “Bear Brand Yarn Manufacturers”_]

    _Front._ Cast on 80 stitches and knit 10 ribs even;
    keep front edge straight and decrease at other side one
    stitch every 6th rib 6 times, then decrease at same
    side every 10th rib 6 times. Work even until front
    is as long as back at underarm seam (68 stitches on
    row, which should measure 13½ inches). Bind off 10
    stitches at sloped side for armhole, then decrease
    at same side one stitch every rib in each of the
    following 10 ribs. From now on keep edge straight at
    armhole and decrease one stitch at neck in each of the
    following 20 ribs. *In next rib bind off 6 stitches at
    armhole for shoulder and decrease one stitch at neck
    as before; repeat from 3 times and fasten off. Mark
    out on the finished front the places for buttons (on
    2d, 20th and 38th rib from neck) and on second front
    make buttonholes in corresponding places, as follows:
    beginning from front edge knit 5 stitches, bind off 4
    stitches, knit to end of row; on next row cast on 4
    stitches opposite those bound off. Sew up shoulder seam
    over 24 stitches.

    _Sleeves._ Cast on firmly 18 stitches and knit 1 row,
    then cast on 3 stitches at beginning of each needle
    until there are 78 stitches in row (30 stitches added
    at each side). Knit 8 ribs even, then decrease one
    stitch at each side every 5th rib 14 times. There
    will then be 50 stitches on row, which should measure
    10 inches across. Knit even until sleeve measures 16
    inches at underarm seam. Now increase one stitch in
    center of row every 3d rib 3 times; knit 2 ribs even
    and bind off on wrong side. Sew up underarm seams and
    place buttons as shown in illustration.

    _Pockets._ Cast on 30 stitches and knit even for 20
    ribs; in following row knit 10 stitches, bind off 10
    stitches, knit to end of row; next row cast on 10
    stitches opposite those bound off; knit 4 ribs even
    and then bind off the 10 center stitches for second
    opening; next row cast on 10 stitches at center as
    before; knit 12 ribs even. Decrease by knitting 2d and
    3d stitches together in beginning of every row (thus
    narrowing at both sides) until there are 10 stitches
    left; knit 8 ribs even, then decrease again at each
    side until only 1 stitch is left; fasten off. Using
    white yarn and a crochet hook, make a slip stitch in
    each stitch on edge of strap, as shown in illustration.
    Slip the tab through the strap opening and fasten point
    down with a button.

    [Illustration: Courtesy of “Bear Brand Yarn
    Manufacturers”]

    _Collar._ With colored Germantown cast on 66 stitches
    and knit 2 ribs; in next row knit 6 stitches, turn and
    knit back to edge (outer edge of collar), turn, knit
    12 stitches, turn and work back to edge; continue in
    this way, each time knitting 6 more stitches off needle
    at one side and at other side always knitting back
    to edge, until all the 66 stitches are again worked
    in a row. Knit straight for 65 ribs, or until collar
    measures 13 inches at inner edge; knit to within 6
    stitches of end of row at inner edge, turn and knit
    back to outer edge, turn, knit to within 12 stitches
    of inner edge, turn and work back to outer edge;
    continue in this way until only 6 stitches are knitted
    from outer edge, work back and then knit 2 ribs on the
    entire 66 stitches. Join white, knit 10 ribs even and
    bind off on wrong side. Pick up the 66 stitches cast
    on at beginning of collar and make second border like
    first, having both borders bound off on same side.

    _Belt._ With colored Germantown cast on 22 stitches
    and knit straight for 31 inches; on next rib make 2
    buttonholes of 4 stitches each, 3 stitches from each
    end; knit 4 ribs even and bind off on wrong side.




CHAPTER XXXIX

RED CROSS KNITTING[T]


EQUIPMENT

    This circular is prepared primarily for the use of hand
    knitters. Knitting machines may be used if desired,
    provided the articles can be as well made and made of
    the same yarn.

    The color of the yarn has been carefully considered
    with the authorities of the War Department and with
    the American Red Cross Commissioner for Europe, in
    Paris. It has been learned from both of these sources
    that articles made in either gray or khaki yarn will
    be acceptable. Owing to the difficulty of securing
    khaki-colored yarn in large quantities the American Red
    Cross Supply Bureau will carry the gray yarn (Oxford
    mixture, 4-ply 10’s construction).

    Yarn and knitting needles may be procured either from
    Red Cross Chapters or from stores, provided the yarn is
    of the same grade and needles of the same size as those
    described in this circular.

    The needles referred to in these directions are
    standardized Red Cross needles which can be purchased
    from Red Cross Chapters. Their diameter is given
    opposite their respective number.

    Red Cross Needles No. 1.  [circle]  125/1000 inches.
    Red Cross Needles No. 2.  [circle]  175/1000 inches.
    Red Cross Needles No. 3.  [circle]  200/1000 inches.


GENERAL DIRECTIONS

    Stitches should not be cast on too tightly.

    Knitting should be done evenly and firmly and all holes
    should be avoided.

    Joining should be done by splicing or by leaving two or
    three inches at each end of the yarn to be darned in
    carefully.

    All knots, ridges or lumps should be most carefully
    avoided, especially in socks, as they are apt to
    blister the feet.


MUFFLER

    Material: 2 hanks of yarn (½ lb.); 1 pair Red Cross
    needles No. 3.

    Cast on 50 stitches or 11 inches. Plain knitting for 68
    inches.

[Illustration: Courtesy Bear Brand Yarn Manufacturers.

RED CROSS KNITTING]


WASH-CLOTH

    Material: White knitting cotton (medium weight); 1 pair
    Red Cross needles No. 1.

    Directions:

    Cast on 70 stitches, knit back and forth plain until
    cloth is about 10 inches square and bind off. Sew a
    loop of tape to one corner.


SLEEVELESS SWEATER

    Material: 2½ hanks of yarn (⅝ lb.); 1 pair Red Cross
    needles No. 3.

    Directions:

    Cast on 80 stitches. Knit 2, purl 2 stitches for 4
    inches. Knit plain until sweater measures 25 inches.
    Knit 28 stitches, bind off 24 stitches for neck, loose.
    Knit 28 stitches. Knit 5 ridges on each shoulder, cast
    on 24 stitches. Knit plain for 21 inches. Purl 2, knit
    2 stitches for 4 inches. Sew up sides, leaving 9 inches
    for armholes. Two rows single crochet around neck and 1
    row single crochet around the armholes.


KNITTED HELMET No. 1

    Material: 1 hank of yarn (¼ lb.); 1 pair Red Cross
    needles No. 2.

    Directions:

    The Helmet is made in 2 parts, which afterwards are
    sewed together along the top and sides.

    Front of Helmet.—Cast on 48 stitches (11 inches), knit
    plain for 25 ribs (6 inches) and knit 2, purl 2 for
    35 rows. On the next row the opening for the face is
    made as follows: Knit 2, purl 2, knit 2, purl 2, knit
    2, knit and bind off loosely the next 28 stitches
    and purl 1, knit 2, purl 2, knit 2, purl 2. Run the
    stitches before the opening on a spare needle and on
    the stitches at other side of opening knit 2, purl 2
    for 12 rows. The last row will end at the opening and
    at that point cast on 28 stitches to offset those bound
    off. Begin at the face opening of stitches on spare
    needle and knit 2, purl 2 for 12 rows. At the end of
    the twelfth row continue all across to the end of other
    needle, when there should be 48 stitches on needle as
    at first. Knit 2, purl 2 for 24 rows.

    Top of Helmet.—Knit 2, narrow (knitting 2 stitches
    together), knit 14, narrow, knit 14, narrow, knit 12.
    Purl the entire next row. On the third row knit 2,
    narrow, knit 13, narrow, knit 13, narrow, knit 11.
    Purl fourth row. On the fifth row knit 2, narrow, knit
    12, narrow, knit 12, narrow, knit 10. Purl sixth row.
    Continue to narrow in the 3 places every plain knitted
    row with 1 stitch less between narrowings until 9
    stitches are left.

    Back of Helmet.—Work in same manner as for front but
    omit the face opening. Sew the stitches of upper edges
    together with joining stitch. Sew up the side seams
    leaving the plain knitting at shoulders open.


KNITTED HELMET No. 2

(Same as No. 1, but knitted in one piece)

    Material: 1 hank of yarn (¼ lb.); 4 Red Cross needles
    No. 2.


    Directions:

    Cast on 56 stitches loosely. Knit plain for 8 inches
    for front piece, and leave on extra needle. Knit
    another piece to correspond for back. These pieces must
    be at least 9 inches wide. Slip the stitches of both
    pieces on to 3 needles, arranging for last 2 stitches
    of back piece to be on beginning of first needle, with
    38 stitches of front piece added (making 40 on first
    needle).

    Divide rest of stitches on other 2 needles; 36-36.

    Beginning with first needle, knit 2, purl 2 for 6
    inches. Then on first needle knit 2, purl 2 for 18
    stitches. Bind off 22 stitches for face opening. (Try
    to keep same arrangement of stitches on needles for
    further directions.) Knit 2, purl 2 forward and back on
    remaining 90 stitches for 1½ inches, always slipping
    first stitch. Cast on 22 stitches loosely to complete
    face opening, and knit 2, purl 2 for 2½ inches (adjust
    stitches by slipping 2 from end of third needle to
    first needle, making 42 on first needle).

    Knit 1 round plain. Knit 2 stitches together, knit
    11, knit 2 stitches together, knit 1. Repeat to end
    of round. Knit 4 rows plain. Then knit 2 stitches
    together, knit 9, knit 2 together, knit 1. Repeat to
    end of round. Knit 4 rows plain. Continue in this way,
    narrowing on every fifth round and reducing number
    of stitches between narrowed stitches by 2 (as 7, 5,
    3, etc.) until you have 28 stitches left on needles.
    Divide on 2 needles, having 14 on first needle and 14
    on the other, and finish the same as for the toe of a
    sock.


WRISTLETS No. 1

    Material: ½ hank of yarn (⅛ lb.); 1 pair Red Cross
    needles No. 2.


    Directions:

    Cast on 48 stitches, knit 2 and purl 2 for 12 inches,
    and sew up leaving 2 inches open space for thumb 2
    inches from the edge.


WRISTLETS No. 2

    Material: ½ hank of yarn (⅛ lb.); 4 Red Cross needles
    No. 1.

    Directions:

    Cast on 52 stitches on 3 needles: 16-16-20. Knit 2,
    purl 2 for 8 inches. To make opening for thumb, knit 2,
    purl 2 to end of third needle, turn; knit and purl back
    to end of first needle, always slipping first stitch;
    turn. Continue knitting back and forth for 2 inches.
    From this point continue as at first for 4 inches for
    the hand. Bind off loosely and buttonhole thumb opening.


MEDIUM SIZED SOCK

    Quantity of wool required: about one-quarter pound.

    56 stitches on three No. 1 Red Cross needles (20 on
    first needle, 20 on second needle, 16 on third needle).


    Heel:

    Knit 2, purl 2, for 3 inches.

    Knit plain 8 inches.

    Divide stitches: 28 on first needle (for heel), 14 on
    second needle, 14 on third needle.

    First needle (*): Knit 1 row, turn. Purl 1 row, turn.
    Repeat from (*) until you have 27 rows. Always slip
    first stitch.


    To Turn Heel:

    Begin to turn heel on wrong side.

    Slip 1, purl 15, purl 2 together, purl 1, turn.

    Slip 1, knit 5, slip 1, knit 1, pass slipped stitch
    over knit stitch, knit 1, turn.

    Slip 1, purl 6, purl 2 together, purl 1, turn.

    Slip 1, knit 7, slip 1, knit 1, pass slipped stitch
    over knit stitch, knit 1, turn.

    Slip 1, purl 8, purl 2 together, purl 1, turn.

    Slip 1, knit 9, slip 1, knit 1, pass slipped stitch
    over knit stitch, knit 1, turn.

    Continue until there are 16 stitches on needle.

[Illustration]


    Gusset:

    Pick up 13 stitches on side of heel. (1st needle.) Knit
    stitches of 2d and 3d needles onto one needle. (2d
    needle.) Pick up 13 stitches on other side of heel,
    and take 8 stitches from first needle. (3d needle.)
    _1st needle_—(A) Knit to within 3 stitches of end, knit
    2 together, knit 1. _2d needle_—(B) Knit plain. _3d
    needle_—(C) Knit 1, slip 1, knit 1, pass slipped stitch
    over knit stitch, knit to end. (D) Knit around plain.

    Repeat A, B, C, D, until you have 14 stitches on 1st
    needle, 28 stitches on 2d needle, 14 stitches on 3d
    needle. Knit plain 5½ inches.

    Kitchener Toe: _1st needle_—(E) Knit to within
    3 stitches of end, knit 2 together, knit 1. _2d
    needle_—(F) Knit 1, slip 1, knit 1, pass slipped stitch
    over knit stitch, knit to within 3 stitches of end,
    knit 2 together, knit 1. _3d needle_—(G) Knit 1, slip
    1, knit 1, pass slipped stitch over knit stitch, knit
    to end. (H) Knit 2 rows plain.

    Repeat E, F, G, H, 3 times (making 4 times in all).
    Then narrow every other row 5 times.

    Knit the 5 stitches of your 1st needle onto your 3d
    needle. You have now 10 stitches on each of the two
    needles. Break wool (leaving 12-inch length) and thread
    it into worsted needle. Hold sock so that the worsted
    needle is at your right and, always keeping wool under
    knitting needles, weave front and back together as
    follows: (*) Pass worsted needle through 1st stitch of
    front knitting needle as if knitting and slip stitch
    off the knitting needle.

    Pass through 2d stitch as if purling and leave stitch
    on the knitting needle. Pass through 1st stitch of back
    needle as if purling and slip stitch off the knitting
    needle. Pass through 2d stitch of back needle as if
    knitting and leave stitch on knitting needle.

    Repeat from (*) until all stitches are off needles. In
    order to avoid ridges across end of toe, fasten wool
    down the side.

    Laid on a level surface the finished sock should
    measure: Foot—Length, 11½ inches, but 10½ to 12½ is
    acceptable. Leg—Length, 14 inches; circumference, 8
    inches. Cuff—Circumference, unstretched, 6 inches;
    stretched to fullest extent, 13½ inches.


BED-SOCK

    Material: 4 Red Cross needles No. 2, 1 hank yarn (¼
    lb.).


    Directions:

    Cast on 48 stitches on 3 needles, 16 on each.

    Knit plain and loosely for 20 inches. Decrease every
    other stitch by knitting 2 together with 12 stitches
    and weave together as per directions on sock.


HOT WATER BOTTLE-COVER

    Material: White knitting cotton (medium weight); 1 pair
    Red Cross needles No. 1.


    Directions:

    Cast on 56 stitches, knit 2, purl 2 and repeat until
    the work is 4 inches deep. Then knit back and forth
    plain for 9½ inches more or until entire work measures
    13½ inches. Next decrease 2 stitches at beginning and 2
    stitches at end of each needle until there are sixteen
    stitches left and bind off. Make another piece in same
    manner and sew together. Attach a 20-inch piece of tape
    to seam at one side of ribbing to tie around neck of
    bottle.

       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES:

[A] There is unfortunately no standard of measure for crochet hooks and
knitting needles. Various manufacturers number them differently. This
scale is used here for convenience only.

[B] To find size of crochet needles, lay the hooks flat against the
circles. To find the size of knitting needles, lay the needles (not the
points) against the circles.

[C] _Cut_ means picture.

[D] For small hair pins.

[E] See how to attach new yarn, page 142.

[F] This work is begun in the middle of the bag—see the knot on the
right-hand edge in the picture.

[G] Cotton string may be used in place of woolen yarn.

[H] Cotton string may be used instead of woolen yarn.

[I] Other methods of casting on stitches are shown on pages 150 and 261.

[J] See How to Cast On Stitches with Knitting Needle, pages 260 and 261.

[K] The doll’s mittens are so small that they are difficult to make. It
would be a good experiment to make one mitten with wrapping yarn before
attempting to use the saxony wool—just for practice.

[L] This sacque is easy for children to make, and should be made before
Sacque No. 2.

[M] This piece is difficult for children to make.

[N] This piece is difficult for children to make.

[O] This piece makes a pretty bonbon holder for the table.

[P] The curly stitches need not come below each other.

[Q] Other methods are explained on pages 150 and 155.

[R] Courtesy Bear Brand Yarn Manufacturers.

[S] Courtesy Bear Brand Yarn Manufacturers.

[T] For the convenience of knitters the directions from the circular of
Red Cross instructions are here given.

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber’s Notes:

Obvious punctuation errors repaired. Text sometimes uses “Material” and
sometimes “Materials” for the lists of items needed for a project. This
was retained as originally printed.

Page 77, “attemptin” changed to “attempting” (69, before attempting)

Page 111, “Runne.” changed to “Runner” (To Make Runner)

Page 146, “Kanck” changed to “Knack” (“I’d like to see you!” said Knack)

Page 155, footnote anchor added to title of instructions for casting on
stitches.

Page 157, caption, “embarassed” changed to “embarrassed” (Looked
embarrassed)

Page 181, “3” added to third cut instruction (CUT 3)

Page 253, “Directions” was moved from the end of the instructions for
the previous pattern to a location after the Materials for LADY’S
CROCHETED NECKLACE which had no “Directions” subtitle.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mary Frances Knitting and
Crocheting Book, by Jane Eayre Fryer

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MARY FRANCES KNITTING, CROCHETING ***

***** This file should be named 52396-0.txt or 52396-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/2/3/9/52396/

Produced by Emmy, MWS and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

